\input texinfo    @c -*- texinfo -*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename org-fractional-cto.info
@settitle org-fractional-cto
@documentencoding UTF-8
@documentlanguage en
@c %**end of header

@dircategory Emacs
@direntry
* org-fractional-cto: (org-fractional-cto). Org-mode workflow for running fractional-CTO engagements.
@end direntry

@finalout
@titlepage
@title org-fractional-cto
@subtitle An Org-mode operating system for fractional-CTO engagements
@author Dhruva Sagar
@end titlepage

@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top org-fractional-cto

org-fractional-cto turns Org mode into an operating system for running
technical client engagements as a fractional CTO or engagement director.  This
manual collects the user guide, the engagement playbook, and the reference into
one place.  Read the guide first; keep the reference open while you work.

@end ifnottex

@menu
* Guide::
* Playbook::
* Reference::

@detailmenu
--- The Detailed Node Listing ---

Guide

* Before you start::
* Step 1 — Install and verify::
* Step 2 — The two concepts you will lean on::
* Step 3 — Onboard your first client::
* Step 3b — Capture a prospect (pre-sales)::
* Step 4 — Fill in CONTEXT.md: Step 4 — Fill in CONTEXTmd. 
* Step 5 — Set the active client::
* Step 6 — Your first capture, in detail: Step 6 — Your first capture in detail. 
* Step 7 — A tour of every capture, in working order: Step 7 — A tour of every capture in working order. 
* Step 8 — Read your dashboard::
* Step 9 — Look across all clients::
* Step 10 — The management commands::
* Step 11 — Make it yours::
* Step 12 — Wire in AI session skills (optional)::
* Step 13 — Settle into the rhythm::
* Troubleshooting::
* Where to go next::

Step 1 — Install and verify

* Install::
* Verify::

Step 2 — The two concepts you will lean on

* The active client::
* The client hub::

Step 3 — Onboard your first client

* Walk the hub it generated::

Step 7 — A tour of every capture, in working order

* Action tracking & delegation::
* Relationship & communication::
* Risk & delivery::
* Technical::
* Innovation::

Action tracking & delegation

* Acting on an action that already exists::

Step 11 — Make it yours

* Override a single template::
* Reorder or extend the dashboard::

Playbook

* The Hat Model::
* Phase −1 — Pre-Sales / Pipeline::
* Phase 0 — Engagement Setup::
* Phase 1 — Discovery::
* Phase 2 — Architecture Assessment::
* Phase 3 — Operating Rhythm::
* Phase 4 — Growth & Innovation::
* New Client Onboarding Checklist::
* Reference All Capture Templates::

The Hat Model

* Hat-switching tools::

Phase 0 — Engagement Setup

* Purpose::
* Checklist::
* Questions to answer::
* Capture templates::
* Deliverable::

Phase 1 — Discovery

* Purpose: Purpose (1). 
* Rhythm::
* Per-session approach::
* Questions that cut across all streams::
* Capture templates: Capture templates (1). 
* Deliverable: Deliverable (1). 

Phase 2 — Architecture Assessment

* Purpose: Purpose (2). 
* Approach::
* Checklist: Checklist (1). 
* Build vs. Buy decision frame: Build vs Buy decision frame. 
* Capture templates: Capture templates (2). 
* Deliverable: Deliverable (2). 

Phase 3 — Operating Rhythm

* Purpose: Purpose (3). 
* Ceremonies::
* Capture templates: Capture templates (3). 
* Managing client expectations::

Phase 4 — Growth & Innovation

* Purpose: Purpose (4). 
* Innovation pipeline approach::
* Expansion conversation triggers::
* Scope change discipline::
* Capture templates: Capture templates (4). 

New Client Onboarding Checklist

* Step 1 — Emacs scaffold (60 seconds)::
* Step 2 — Fill CONTEXT.md: Step 2 — Fill CONTEXTmd. 
* Step 3 — Capture key contacts::
* Step 4 — Tools (if doing implementation work)::
* First week checklist::

Reference: All Capture Templates

* Relationship & Communication::
* Action Tracking & Delegation::
* Risk & Delivery::
* Technical: Technical (1). 

Reference

* Quick Lookup — "I need to@dots{}"::
* Legend::
* File Organization::
* Capture Templates — Complete Reference::
* Operating Rhythms — Day by Day::
* The Hat Model in Practice::
* Tools Reference::
* New Client Setup::
* Scenario Guides::

Quick Lookup — "I need to@dots{}"

* Capture something::
* Act on an existing item::
* Look up / analyse::

Legend

* keywords::
* Engagement stages (tag on the engagement heading)::
* Priorities::
* Type tags::
* Key bindings::

File Organization

* The capture flow::
* The lookup flow::

Capture Templates — Complete Reference

* Relationship & Communication Templates::
* Action Tracking & Delegation Templates::
* Risk & Delivery Templates::
* Technical Templates::

Relationship & Communication Templates

* @samp{es} — Standup Notes::
* @samp{em} — Client Meeting::
* @samp{ei} — Internal Sync::
* @samp{ep} — Stakeholder Profile::
* @samp{ec} — Commitment Captured::
* @samp{eh} — Client Health Check::
* @samp{eq} — QBR (Quarterly Business Review)::

Action Tracking & Delegation Templates

* @samp{ew} — Action Item (quick TODO)::
* @samp{eg} — Delegate Action (WAITING)::
* @samp{eb} — Blocker / Escalation::
* Acting on an item that already exists (@samp{delegate-at-point}, @samp{block-at-point}): Acting on an item that already exists (@samp{delegate-at-point} @samp{block-at-point}). 
* @samp{eW} — Weekly Review::
* @samp{eP} — Person / Team Member Note::

Risk & Delivery Templates

* @samp{er} — Risk Item::
* @samp{ee} — Scope Change / Out-of-Scope Flag::
* @samp{ef} — Post-Mortem / Incident::
* @samp{eR} — Retrospective::

Technical Templates

* @samp{ed} — Discovery Session::
* @samp{ea} — Architecture Decision Record (ADR)::
* @samp{eA} — Architecture Health Review::
* @samp{ev} — Vendor / Tool Evaluation::
* @samp{et} — Technical Debt Item::
* @samp{ex} — Security Finding::
* @samp{en} — Innovation Pipeline Idea::

Operating Rhythms — Day by Day

* Daily::
* Weekly::
* Monthly::
* Quarterly::

The Hat Model in Practice

* Before any significant session::
* Hat descriptions::

Tools Reference

* org-capture (@samp{C-c c})::
* org-agenda (@samp{C-c a})::
* org-clock::
* org-refile::
* org-roam::
* How AI skills associate with an Org work item::
* mattpocock/skills::
* gstack (garrytan/gstack)::

New Client Setup

* Step 1 — Run org-fractional-cto-new-client::
* Step 2 — Fill CONTEXT.md: Step 2 — Fill CONTEXTmd (1). 
* Step 3 — Set active client::
* Step 4 — Capture key contacts::
* Step 5 — Tools (if doing implementation work)::
* First week checklist: First week checklist (1). 

Scenario Guides

* "I just had a discovery session"::
* "Something went wrong in production"::
* "Client asked for something that might be out of scope"::
* "I want to pitch an innovation idea"::
* "I need to make an architecture decision"::
* "Preparing for a QBR"::
* "Starting a new engagement for the first time"::

@end detailmenu
@end menu

@node Guide
@chapter Guide

This guide walks you through @strong{every feature}, in the order you would actually
meet them: install and verify, onboard a client, capture work, read the
dashboard, look across clients, and tailor the system. It assumes you are
comfortable in Emacs and Org (@samp{M-x}, @samp{C-c c} capture, the agenda dispatcher,
editing your init file).

It complements the other two documents rather than repeating them:

@itemize
@item
This @strong{guide} is the hand-held tour — @emph{how do I use the tool?}
@item
@uref{playbook.org, playbook.org} is the methodology — @emph{how do I run the engagement?}
@item
@uref{reference.org, reference.org} is the lookup — @emph{what does each capture and tag mean?}
@end itemize

Work through it once, top to bottom, with Emacs open. Every step says what you
should @strong{see} so you can confirm it worked before moving on.

@menu
* Before you start::
* Step 1 — Install and verify::
* Step 2 — The two concepts you will lean on::
* Step 3 — Onboard your first client::
* Step 3b — Capture a prospect (pre-sales)::
* Step 4 — Fill in CONTEXT.md: Step 4 — Fill in CONTEXTmd. 
* Step 5 — Set the active client::
* Step 6 — Your first capture, in detail: Step 6 — Your first capture in detail. 
* Step 7 — A tour of every capture, in working order: Step 7 — A tour of every capture in working order. 
* Step 8 — Read your dashboard::
* Step 9 — Look across all clients::
* Step 10 — The management commands::
* Step 11 — Make it yours::
* Step 12 — Wire in AI session skills (optional)::
* Step 13 — Settle into the rhythm::
* Troubleshooting::
* Where to go next::
@end menu

@node Before you start
@section Before you start

You need:

@itemize
@item
@strong{Emacs 27.1+} and @strong{Org 9.4+} (@samp{M-x org-version}).
@item
@samp{org-capture} bound to a key. This guide assumes the conventional
@code{C-c c}. If you have not bound it: @code{(global-set-key (kbd "C-c c") #'org-capture)}.
@item
@samp{org-agenda} bound to @code{C-c a} (the Org default).
@item
A directory to hold clients. The default is @samp{<org-directory>/clients}; this
guide uses @samp{~/org/clients}.
@end itemize

Throughout, the example client is @strong{Acme Corp} with the slug @samp{acme}.

@node Step 1 — Install and verify
@section Step 1 — Install and verify

@menu
* Install::
* Verify::
@end menu

@node Install
@subsection Install

With @samp{use-package} from a local clone:

@lisp
(use-package org-fractional-cto
  :load-path "~/src/org-fractional-cto"
  :after org
  :custom
  (org-fractional-cto-clients-directory "~/org/clients")
  (org-fractional-cto-author "Your Name")
  :config
  (org-fractional-cto-setup))
@end lisp

Or manually:

@lisp
(add-to-list 'load-path "~/src/org-fractional-cto")
(require 'org-fractional-cto)
(setq org-fractional-cto-clients-directory "~/org/clients")
(org-fractional-cto-setup)
@end lisp

@samp{org-fractional-cto-setup} does three things: installs the @samp{e} capture group,
registers the dashboard agenda command, and adds your existing client
directories to @samp{org-agenda-files}. It is @strong{idempotent} — safe to run again any
time (e.g. after you edit @samp{org-fractional-cto-dashboard-blocks}). Re-running
refreshes the captures and the dashboard in place rather than duplicating them,
so @code{M-x org-fractional-cto-setup} is the way to apply config changes without
restarting Emacs.

@node Verify
@subsection Verify

Three quick checks before you create anything:

@enumerate
@item
@strong{Setup ran.} @code{M-x org-fractional-cto-setup} returns without error.
@item
@strong{Dashboard is registered.} Press @code{C-c a}. The dispatcher should list:
@samp{E   Fractional CTO — client dashboard}. (Press @samp{q} to dismiss.)
@item
@strong{Captures are installed.} Press @code{C-c c}. You should see
@samp{e   Engagement (select client)} in the menu. (Press @samp{C-g} to dismiss.)
@end enumerate

If all three pass, the package is live.

@node Step 2 — The two concepts you will lean on
@section Step 2 — The two concepts you will lean on

Before onboarding, understand the two ideas the whole workflow rests on.

@menu
* The active client::
* The client hub::
@end menu

@node The active client
@subsection The active client

Almost everything is scoped to one client at a time. Instead of a key prefix
per client, you set an @strong{active client} once per session and every capture and
the dashboard follow it.

@multitable {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa}
@headitem Command
@tab Effect
@item @samp{M-x org-fractional-cto-set-active-client}
@tab Pick the client for this session
@item @samp{M-x org-fractional-cto-clear-active-client}
@tab Go back to being prompted per capture
@item @samp{M-x org-fractional-cto-switch-client}
@tab Set active @strong{and} open its dashboard
@end multitable

With an active client set, @code{C-c c e ...} and @code{C-c a E} never prompt. With none
set, they prompt you to choose — nothing breaks, it is just one extra step.

@node The client hub
@subsection The client hub

Each client owns a directory with three files:

@example
~/org/clients/
  acme/
    acme.org      ← operational hub: one section per capture type
    standup.org   ← per-client standup template (the es capture reads this)
    CONTEXT.md    ← domain glossary, people, tech stack (load in AI sessions)
@end example

The hub's section headings, the capture targets, and the dashboard's queries
are all generated from a single section list, so they agree by construction —
you never wire a capture to a heading by hand.

@node Step 3 — Onboard your first client
@section Step 3 — Onboard your first client

Run:

@example
M-x org-fractional-cto-new-client
@end example


You are asked for two things:

@enumerate
@item
@strong{Client name (display)} — e.g. @samp{Acme Corp}. Becomes the file @samp{#+title}, the
top-level heading, and the agenda @samp{:CATEGORY:}. (The @samp{#+AUTHOR} line is set
separately from @samp{org-fractional-cto-author}.)
@item
@strong{Client slug} — e.g. @samp{acme}. Lowercase, no spaces; it names the directory
and files, and is upper-cased into the Org tag (@samp{acme} → @samp{:ACME:};
non-alphanumerics become @samp{_}, so @samp{acme-eu} → @samp{:ACME_EU:}).
@end enumerate

The command then creates @samp{acme/acme.org}, @samp{acme/standup.org}, and
@samp{acme/CONTEXT.md}, adds the new directory to @samp{org-agenda-files} immediately (no
restart), and opens @samp{CONTEXT.md} for you to fill in.

@menu
* Walk the hub it generated::
@end menu

@node Walk the hub it generated
@subsection Walk the hub it generated

Open @samp{acme/acme.org}. At the top is a @samp{#+TODO} line defining the workflow's
states:

@example
#+TODO: TODO NEXT INPROGRESS WAITING | DONE CANCELLED
@end example

(Note @samp{INPROGRESS} has no hyphen — that is deliberate; see @ref{Troubleshooting}.)
This line is a convenience, not a requirement: @samp{org-fractional-cto-setup} already
registers the same keyword sequence into the global @samp{org-todo-keywords}, so the
states work in any buffer even before you open a hub. The per-file line just
means a hub still cycles correctly on a machine where setup never ran.

Below the top-level @samp{* Acme Corp Engagement  :ACTIVE:} heading is one @samp{**} section
per capture type — @samp{Actions}, @samp{Delegations}, @samp{Blockers}, @samp{People}, @samp{Commitments},
@samp{Risks}, @samp{Meeting Notes}, …, @samp{Retrospectives} — each tagged with only its type
subtag (e.g. @samp{** Delegations  :DELEGATED:}). The client identity is declared once
at file level via @samp{#+filetags: :ACME:} and is inherited by every heading — so
captures never carry a redundant per-item client tag. You do not edit these by
hand; captures file into them. Seeing the whole engagement in one outline is the
point — fold with @samp{overview}, expand the section you need.

@node Step 3b — Capture a prospect (pre-sales)
@section Step 3b — Capture a prospect (pre-sales)

A prospect is just a client at an earlier stage. Before an engagement is won you
still want to capture calls, do research, and track follow-ups — and the
dashboard already does that. Onboard a prospect with:

@example
M-x org-fractional-cto-new-prospect
@end example


It scaffolds the same hub as a client but stamps the engagement heading with the
@samp{LEAD} stage tag, sets the prospect active, and opens the @strong{pre-sales call}
capture (@samp{el}) so you record the conversation immediately. From there:

@itemize
@item
@samp{C-c c el} — capture each pre-sales call (the ask, pain, signals, next step).
@item
@samp{C-c c eo} — log research findings as you learn about the company, market, and
tech. Fold the durable facts into @samp{CONTEXT.md}.
@item
@samp{C-c c eF} — record a fit / qualification verdict (Pursue / Hold / Pass).
@item
@samp{C-c c ew} / @samp{eg} / @samp{eb} — ordinary actions, delegations, and blockers work
here too, so your pre-sales follow-ups land on the dashboard like any work.
@end itemize

As the prospect advances, move the stage with @samp{M-x org-fractional-cto-set-stage}
(@samp{LEAD} → @samp{QUALIFIED} → @samp{ACTIVE} when you win, or @samp{LOST}). Across all clients,
@samp{C-c a P} shows the whole pipeline — every @samp{LEAD} / @samp{QUALIFIED} engagement, one
line each.

If you have hubs created before stages existed, run @samp{M-x
org-fractional-cto-upgrade-hub} on each to add the new sections and an @samp{ACTIVE}
stage tag.

@node Step 4 — Fill in CONTEXTmd
@section Step 4 — Fill in CONTEXT.md

@samp{CONTEXT.md} is the human (and AI) brief for the engagement. It opens
automatically after onboarding, pre-populated with section headers:

@itemize
@item
@strong{What We're Building} — one paragraph on the product and the mandate.
@item
@strong{Domain Vocabulary} — the terms the team uses; the highest-leverage section.
@item
@strong{Tech Stack} — as known at onboarding.
@item
@strong{Key People} — client side and your side.
@item
@strong{Active Work Streams} and @strong{Current Priorities}.
@end itemize

Fill at least vocabulary, people, and priorities now; the rest accretes. If you
do hands-on implementation with an AI agent, load this file at the start of each
session so the agent speaks the client's language. It is plain Markdown so it
travels into any tool.

@node Step 5 — Set the active client
@section Step 5 — Set the active client

Back from @samp{CONTEXT.md}:

@example
M-x org-fractional-cto-set-active-client
@end example


Choose @samp{acme}. The echo area confirms @samp{Active client: acme}. From here, every
capture and the dashboard target Acme with no prompting.

@itemize
@item
@samp{org-fractional-cto-clear-active-client} returns to per-capture prompting.
@item
@samp{org-fractional-cto-switch-client} sets a @strong{different} client active and opens
its dashboard in one step — the fast path when you change context.
@end itemize

The active client is per-session state; it resets when Emacs restarts. Set it
once when you sit down to work on a client.

@node Step 6 — Your first capture in detail
@section Step 6 — Your first capture, in detail

Capture an action. Press @code{C-c c e w}:

@enumerate
@item
@code{C-c c} opens org-capture; @samp{e} selects the engagement group; @samp{w} selects
@strong{Action item}.
@item
You are prompted for the action text, then a deadline.
@item
Org files a @samp{TODO} under Acme's @samp{Actions} section, stamped with the creation
time, and @strong{clocks in} (the @samp{ew} template sets @samp{:clock-in}). The client tag
@samp{:ACME:} is inherited from @samp{#+filetags} — it does not appear on the item itself.
The capture template also auto-fills the client display name (no @samp{Client:} prompt).
@item
Finish with @code{C-c C-c} to file it (which also clocks out), or @code{C-c C-k} to
abort.
@end enumerate

Open @samp{acme.org} and confirm the new @samp{TODO} sits under @samp{** Actions}. That round
trip — pick a key, answer the prompts, it lands in the right section already
tagged — is the entire capture model. Two things make it work:

@itemize
@item
@strong{Routing.} Each template targets a section heading by name in the active
client's hub. No inbox, no manual refiling.
@item
@strong{Two kinds of template.} Short captures (action, risk, commitment, …) are
inline; richer ones (discovery, ADR, QBR, …) are filled from a file in the
bundled @samp{templates/} folder, which you can override (see @ref{Step 11 — Make it yours, , Step 11}). The
@strong{standup} (@samp{es}) is special: it reads the client's own @samp{standup.org} so you can
tailor the streams to the real team, falling back to the bundled template.
@end itemize

@node Step 7 — A tour of every capture in working order
@section Step 7 — A tour of every capture, in working order

All engagement captures live under @code{C-c c e}. Here is the full set, grouped the
way you use them. For each: the key, what it captures, the hub section it files
into, and when to reach for it. (Field-by-field detail is in @uref{reference.org, reference.org}.)

@menu
* Action tracking & delegation::
* Relationship & communication::
* Risk & delivery::
* Technical::
* Innovation::
@end menu

@node Action tracking & delegation
@subsection Action tracking & delegation

@multitable {aaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa}
@headitem Key
@tab Captures
@tab Files to
@tab Reach for it when…
@item @samp{ew}
@tab Action item (TODO)
@tab Actions
@tab A task lands on @emph{your} plate
@item @samp{eg}
@tab Delegate (WAITING)
@tab Delegations
@tab You hand a task to someone — sets @samp{WAITING}
@item @samp{eb}
@tab Blocker / escalation
@tab Blockers
@tab Something is blocking delivery
@item @samp{eW}
@tab Weekly review
@tab Weekly Reviews
@tab Your Friday delegation + team pulse pass
@item @samp{eP}
@tab Person / team note
@tab People
@tab Capacity, a concern, or a win to record
@end multitable

@samp{eg} is the engine of the @strong{Delegated} dashboard block: it files in the @samp{WAITING}
state, which is how the system separates "things I owe" from "things I am owed."

@menu
* Acting on an action that already exists::
@end menu

@node Acting on an action that already exists
@subsubsection Acting on an action that already exists

@samp{ew}, @samp{eg} and @samp{eb} all @strong{create} an item. Two commands instead act on the Org
heading already under your cursor, so you never retype work that is already
captured:

@itemize
@item
@samp{M-x org-fractional-cto-delegate-at-point} — hand off the action at point. It
flips the heading to @samp{WAITING}, adds the @samp{DELEGATED} tag, records who now owns
it (@samp{ASSIGNED_TO}) and when (@samp{DELEGATED_ON}), and schedules your follow-up
check-in (@samp{SCHEDULED}), optionally with a delivery @samp{DEADLINE}. It is @samp{eg}
applied in place — the action moves from @strong{Open actions} to @strong{Delegated —
awaiting response} on the next dashboard refresh.
@item
@samp{M-x org-fractional-cto-block-at-point} — raise a blocker against the action
at point. It files a @samp{[#A]} blocker into the client's @strong{Blockers} section with
its @samp{BLOCKING} property linked back to the action, and drops a back-reference
under the action itself, so the two sides point at each other.
@end itemize

Both are bound to @samp{g} and @samp{b} in @samp{org-fractional-cto-command-map} (see
@ref{Step 10 — The management commands, , Step 10}). They can also be invoked
@strong{directly on an agenda line} — Evil users get @samp{, g} (delegate) and @samp{, b} (block)
in the agenda's motion state; non-Evil users can set
@samp{org-fractional-cto-agenda-keymap-prefix} for a prefix key, or use @samp{M-x}.
Reach for these when the work is already on a heading; reach for @samp{eg} / @samp{eb} when
you are capturing something new.

@node Relationship & communication
@subsection Relationship & communication

@multitable {aaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa}
@headitem Key
@tab Captures
@tab Files to
@tab Reach for it when…
@item @samp{es}
@tab Standup
@tab Standup Notes
@tab Daily standup (reads @samp{standup.org})
@item @samp{em}
@tab Client meeting
@tab Meeting Notes
@tab Any client-facing sync
@item @samp{ei}
@tab Internal sync
@tab Internal Syncs
@tab Your team's internal sync
@item @samp{ec}
@tab Commitment
@tab Commitments
@tab A promise is made (by you or them)
@item @samp{ep}
@tab Stakeholder profile
@tab Stakeholder Profiles
@tab Profiling a decision-maker
@item @samp{eh}
@tab Client health check
@tab Health Checks
@tab Monthly pulse questions
@item @samp{eM}
@tab Metrics snapshot
@tab Health Checks
@tab Logging the week's funnel/metrics
@item @samp{eq}
@tab QBR
@tab QBRs
@tab Quarterly business review prep
@end multitable

@node Risk & delivery
@subsection Risk & delivery

@multitable {aaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa}
@headitem Key
@tab Captures
@tab Files to
@tab Reach for it when…
@item @samp{er}
@tab Risk
@tab Risks
@tab A delivery or engagement risk appears
@item @samp{ee}
@tab Scope change
@tab Scope Changes
@tab Work surfaces outside the SOW
@item @samp{ef}
@tab Post-mortem
@tab Post-Mortems
@tab @emph{Reactive} — something failed
@item @samp{eR}
@tab Retrospective
@tab Retrospectives
@tab @emph{Routine} — every sprint, failure or not
@end multitable

Keep @samp{ef} and @samp{eR} distinct: a post-mortem is written because something broke; a
retrospective runs on cadence regardless.

@node Technical
@subsection Technical

@multitable {aaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa}
@headitem Key
@tab Captures
@tab Files to
@tab Reach for it when…
@item @samp{ed}
@tab Discovery session
@tab Discovery Sessions
@tab Interviewing a stream / mapping
@item @samp{ek}
@tab Tech spike
@tab Discovery Sessions
@tab A timeboxed technical exploration
@item @samp{ea}
@tab ADR
@tab Architecture Decisions
@tab Recording a significant decision
@item @samp{eD}
@tab Quick decision
@tab Architecture Decisions
@tab A lighter decision worth a record
@item @samp{eA}
@tab Architecture review
@tab Architecture Reviews
@tab A formal architecture health pass
@item @samp{ev}
@tab Vendor evaluation
@tab Vendor Evaluations
@tab Assessing a tool or vendor
@item @samp{et}
@tab Technical debt item
@tab Technical Debt
@tab You hear/see debt worth tracking
@item @samp{ex}
@tab Security finding
@tab Security Findings
@tab Any security or compliance signal
@end multitable

@node Innovation
@subsection Innovation

@multitable {aaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa}
@headitem Key
@tab Captures
@tab Files to
@tab Reach for it when…
@item @samp{en}
@tab Innovation idea
@tab Innovation Pipeline
@tab A single opportunity occurs
@item @samp{eI}
@tab Innovation meeting
@tab Innovation Pipeline
@tab A multi-idea ideation session
@end multitable

By now you have met every capture. You do not need to memorise the table —
@code{C-c c e} shows the menu, and the mnemonic is roughly "first letter of the
thing." The richer templates clock in automatically so your time tracking is a
by-product of working.

@node Step 8 — Read your dashboard
@section Step 8 — Read your dashboard

Press @code{C-c a E} (or @code{M-x org-fractional-cto-dashboard}). You get a @strong{global} board
spanning all client files, with nine blocks, in this order:

@enumerate
@item
@strong{Next 7 days} — scheduled items and deadlines from the hub.
@item
@strong{Delegated — awaiting response} — everything @samp{WAITING}, deadline-sorted.
This is your "work I am owed" inbox; nothing should sit here a full week
without a check-in.
@item
@strong{Blockers & escalations} — anything tagged @samp{BLOCKER}.
@item
@strong{Open actions} — your @samp{TODO} / @samp{NEXT} / @samp{INPROGRESS} work, with blockers and
commitments filtered out so they are not double-listed.
@item
@strong{Commitments} — promises made, by you or the client.
@item
@strong{Active risks} — the risk register (the section container is skipped, so you
see the risks themselves, not the empty parent heading). A risk closed out
with @samp{Status: Resolved} or @samp{Mitigated} drops off the board; @samp{Open} and
@samp{Accepted} risks stay.
@item
@strong{Open security findings} — @samp{[SECURITY]} findings, with closed-out ones
(@samp{Status: Resolved} or @samp{Mitigated}) filtered out — the @strong{same closed-set rule}
as risks.
@item
@strong{Open tech debt} — every @samp{[TECH DEBT]} item recorded for the client.
@item
@strong{Scope changes — pending decisions} — @samp{SCOPE CHANGE} entries sorted by their
"decision needed by" deadline, so a decision due beyond the seven-day agenda
window is still visible here.
@end enumerate

Blocks 6–9 are the @strong{watch list}: severity-rated liabilities (risks, security
findings, tech debt) and scope decisions that carry no @samp{TODO} keyword and so
would otherwise never appear in an action view.

Because the dashboard is a @strong{real Org agenda command}, not a bespoke function, it
inherits the dispatcher's powers: refresh with @samp{r}, filter with @samp{/}, narrow by
tag, export, and it is sticky-agenda aware. The dashboard spans @strong{all} client
files. When an active client is set, the view opens pre-focused on that client
via the native @samp{org-agenda-tag-filter-preset}, and the @samp{CATEGORY} column shows
each entry's client. Use the agenda's native @samp{/} key to widen, refocus on a
different client, or clear the filter; there is no separate focus command.
@samp{org-fractional-cto-set-tag-inheritance} (on by default) ensures the inherited
client filetag is visible to the filter.
@samp{M-x org-fractional-cto-switch-client} sets a different client active and
re-opens the board pre-focused to it in one step.

@node Step 9 — Look across all clients
@section Step 9 — Look across all clients

With an active client the dashboard opens focused; clear the filter (@samp{/} then
@samp{<RET>}) to go portfolio-wide without leaving the board. For raw cross-client
lookups by type, use the plain agenda dispatcher:

@multitable {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa}
@headitem Keys
@tab Shows
@item @code{C-c a m RISK}
@tab Every risk, across all clients
@item @code{C-c a m DELEGATED}
@tab Everything you have delegated, anywhere
@item @code{C-c a m BLOCKER}
@tab All blockers everywhere
@item @code{C-c a t}
@tab All TODOs across clients
@end multitable

The full tag legend (one tag per capture type) is in the README and
@uref{reference.org, reference.org}. The pattern: @samp{C-c a m <TAG>} turns any capture type into a
cross-client list.

@node Step 10 — The management commands
@section Step 10 — The management commands

Five commands run the lifecycle. They are available via @samp{M-x} and also live in
@samp{org-fractional-cto-command-map} under the keys shown:

@multitable {aaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa}
@headitem Map key
@tab Command
@tab Action
@item @samp{n}
@tab @samp{org-fractional-cto-new-client}
@tab New client (onboard)
@item @samp{s}
@tab @samp{org-fractional-cto-set-active-client}
@tab Set active client
@item @samp{k}
@tab @samp{org-fractional-cto-clear-active-client}
@tab Clear active client
@item @samp{d}
@tab @samp{org-fractional-cto-dashboard}
@tab Global dashboard (pre-filtered to active client)
@item @samp{w}
@tab @samp{org-fractional-cto-switch-client}
@tab Switch client + open dashboard
@item @samp{g}
@tab @samp{org-fractional-cto-delegate-at-point}
@tab Delegate the action at point
@item @samp{b}
@tab @samp{org-fractional-cto-block-at-point}
@tab Blocker against action at point
@item @samp{h}
@tab @samp{org-fractional-cto-docs}
@tab Open the manuals
@end multitable

@samp{g} and @samp{b} act on the Org heading at point — both @strong{from within a hub file} and
@strong{directly from an agenda line} (see @ref{Acting on an action that already exists, , Step 7}); the rest are session-level management
commands.

The map is @strong{not} bound to any prefix by default (@samp{org-fractional-cto-keymap-prefix}
is @samp{nil}), because common prefixes like @samp{C-c f} are already taken (Magit). Opt
in by setting the prefix @strong{before} @samp{setup}:

@lisp
(setq org-fractional-cto-keymap-prefix "C-c k")  ; then n/s/k/d/w under C-c k
@end lisp

@node Step 11 — Make it yours
@section Step 11 — Make it yours

Everything tunable lives in the @samp{org-fractional-cto} customize group
(@code{M-x customize-group RET org-fractional-cto}):

@multitable {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa}
@headitem Variable
@tab Default
@tab Purpose
@item @samp{org-fractional-cto-clients-directory}
@tab @samp{<org-directory>/clients}
@tab Where engagements live
@item @samp{org-fractional-cto-template-directory}
@tab bundled @samp{templates/}
@tab Capture template files
@item @samp{org-fractional-cto-author}
@tab @samp{user-full-name}
@tab @samp{#+AUTHOR} in scaffolded files
@item @samp{org-fractional-cto-agenda-key}
@tab ="E"
@tab Dispatcher key for the dashboard
@item @samp{org-fractional-cto-keymap-prefix}
@tab @samp{nil}
@tab Optional command-map prefix
@item @samp{org-fractional-cto-dashboard-blocks}
@tab (9 blocks)
@tab The dashboard's agenda blocks
@item @samp{org-fractional-cto-todo-keywords}
@tab (1 sequence)
@tab TODO keyword sequences the workflow registers globally
@item @samp{org-fractional-cto-todo-keyword-faces}
@tab (INPROGRESS face)
@tab Faces for workflow TODO keywords
@item @samp{org-fractional-cto-set-tag-inheritance}
@tab @samp{t}
@tab Enable inherited filetag filtering in the dashboard
@item @samp{org-fractional-cto-agenda-keymap-prefix}
@tab @samp{nil}
@tab Prefix key for at-point actions in agendas (non-Evil)
@end multitable

Two customisations you are most likely to want:

@menu
* Override a single template::
* Reorder or extend the dashboard::
@end menu

@node Override a single template
@subsection Override a single template

Copy the bundled @samp{templates/} folder somewhere of your own, edit only the file
you care about (say @samp{adr.org}), and point the variable at your copy:

@lisp
(setq org-fractional-cto-template-directory "~/org/ofc-templates")
@end lisp

@node Reorder or extend the dashboard
@subsection Reorder or extend the dashboard

@samp{org-fractional-cto-dashboard-blocks} is an ordinary list of Org agenda series
entries. Drop a block, reorder them, or add your own — for example, a block for
@samp{NEXT} items first — then re-run @code{M-x org-fractional-cto-setup} to apply it (the
install is idempotent, so this refreshes the command in place).

@node Step 12 — Wire in AI session skills (optional)
@section Step 12 — Wire in AI session skills (optional)

If you also do hands-on implementation with an AI agent, two skill packs pair
well with the workflow. They live in your @strong{code} repositories, not here; the
link between them and Org is the @samp{CONTEXT.md} file plus the captured artifacts.
The loop is: Org tells you @emph{what} and @emph{why} → the skill helps you @emph{do} it → you
capture the @emph{outcome} back into Org. See the README's
"Working with AI session skills" section for the per-capture skill mapping.

@node Step 13 — Settle into the rhythm
@section Step 13 — Settle into the rhythm

You now know every moving part. The operating cadence ties them together:

@itemize
@item
@strong{Daily} — attend standups (@samp{es}), capture blockers (@samp{eb}) as they surface.
@item
@strong{Weekly} — delegation + pulse review (@samp{eW}); internal sync (@samp{ei}) before any
client comms; client sync (@samp{em}); sprint retro (@samp{eR}). Clear the @strong{Delegated}
block on the dashboard.
@item
@strong{Monthly} — client health check (@samp{eh}); review the innovation pipeline (@samp{en}).
@item
@strong{Quarterly} — QBR (@samp{eq}); architecture health review (@samp{eA}).
@end itemize

The @emph{why} behind this cadence — the engagement phases, the "hat" model, and the
decision frameworks — is the job of @uref{playbook.org, playbook.org}. Read it next.

@node Troubleshooting
@section Troubleshooting

@itemize
@item
@strong{Every capture prompts me for a client.} No active client is set. Run
@samp{org-fractional-cto-set-active-client} (or @samp{switch-client}). This is expected
behaviour, not a bug — it just means one extra keystroke per capture.

@item
@strong{An @samp{INPROGRESS} task is missing from the dashboard's Open actions.} First
confirm @samp{org-fractional-cto-setup} ran — it registers @samp{INPROGRESS} globally, so
if it never ran (and the file lacks a @samp{#+TODO} line) the state is unknown.
Second, the keyword must be exactly @samp{INPROGRESS}, with @strong{no hyphen}. Org's
agenda match language treats @samp{-} as a boolean NOT, so a hyphenated keyword
(@samp{IN-PROGRESS}) is parsed as "@samp{IN} and not @samp{PROGRESS}" and never matches.
Scaffolded hubs use the hyphen-free form; if you have an old hub, fix its
@samp{#+TODO} line and any task states.

@item
@strong{The dashboard shows no entries for my client.} The dashboard now spans all
client files. If no active client is set, all clients appear unfiltered. Set
one with @samp{M-x org-fractional-cto-set-active-client} to focus the board. If the
filter is not working, ensure @samp{org-fractional-cto-set-tag-inheritance} is @samp{t} (the
default) so the inherited client filetag is visible to the agenda filter.

@item
@strong{A standup capture inserts literal @samp{%^@{...@}} / @samp{%U} text.} You are on an old
version where the standup was injected as a string. Update the package; the
standup is now read as a file template so its escapes expand normally.

@item
@strong{@code{C-c a E} is not listed in the dispatcher.} @samp{setup} has not run (or ran
before Org loaded). Ensure @samp{org-fractional-cto-setup} runs @samp{:after org}, then
re-run it — it is idempotent.

@item
@strong{I changed config but nothing updated.} Re-run @code{M-x org-fractional-cto-setup}.
It refreshes captures and the dashboard in place; no restart needed.
@end itemize

@node Where to go next
@section Where to go next

@itemize
@item
@uref{playbook.org, playbook.org} — the engagement methodology: phases, the hat model, and
decision frameworks (build-vs-buy, ADR triggers, scope discipline).
@item
@uref{reference.org, reference.org} — per-capture field guidance, the full tag/keyword legend, and
scenario guides ("I just had a discovery session", "something went wrong in
production", …).
@item
@uref{../README.org, README.org} — installation, the capture/tag reference tables, and AI-skill
integration.
@end itemize

@node Playbook
@chapter Playbook

A repeatable process for onboarding, running, and growing client engagements as a
Fractional CTO & Engagement Director. Adapt per client — this is a map, not a script.

The playbook operates across five phases. Each phase has a dominant @strong{hat}, a set of
@strong{questions to drive the work}, the @strong{capture templates} to use, and a @strong{deliverable}.

@menu
* The Hat Model::
* Phase −1 — Pre-Sales / Pipeline::
* Phase 0 — Engagement Setup::
* Phase 1 — Discovery::
* Phase 2 — Architecture Assessment::
* Phase 3 — Operating Rhythm::
* Phase 4 — Growth & Innovation::
* New Client Onboarding Checklist::
* Reference All Capture Templates::
@end menu

@node The Hat Model
@section The Hat Model

You operate across six modes. The discipline is to not switch hats mid-session.
Schedule explicit @strong{hat blocks} — a discovery session is discovery only; an
architecture session is architecture only. Mixing them produces mediocre output
in both directions.

@multitable {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa}
@headitem Hat
@tab When to wear it
@tab Key discipline
@item Engagement Director
@tab Client calls, QBRs, scope conversations
@tab Speak business outcomes, not tech
@item Discovery
@tab Stream interviews, system mapping
@tab Listen more than you talk
@item Fractional CTO
@tab ADRs, roadmap, build vs. buy decisions
@tab First principles, not vendor bias
@item QA Auditor
@tab Test coverage review, release gates
@tab Find the gaps the team normalised
@item Security Reviewer
@tab Compliance posture, infra review
@tab Assume breach, work backwards
@item DevOps Reviewer
@tab CI/CD, infra, deployment, on-call
@tab Optimise for recovery speed, not uptime
@end multitable

@menu
* Hat-switching tools::
@end menu

@node Hat-switching tools
@subsection Hat-switching tools

@strong{@uref{https://github.com/mattpocock/skills, mattpocock/skills}} — precision tools for focused sessions:
@itemize
@item
@samp{/grill-me} — structured interview @strong{before} any work starts; surfaces misalignment early
@item
@samp{/grill-with-docs} — same, but anchored to a specific document (e.g. an SOW or PRD)
@item
@samp{/zoom-out} — forces system-level thinking before diving into a stream
@item
@samp{/handoff} — compacts the session into a document so context survives a hat switch
@item
@samp{CONTEXT.md} — per-client domain glossary; load it at the start of every Claude Code session
@end itemize

@strong{@uref{https://github.com/garrytan/gstack, garrytan/gstack}} — sprint structure for execution phases:
@itemize
@item
@samp{/office-hours} — six forcing questions that challenge your framing @strong{before} you commit to a direction
@item
@samp{/autoplan} — chains CEO review, engineering review, design review
@item
@samp{/review} — staff-engineer audit after implementation
@item
@samp{/cso} — OWASP Top 10 + STRIDE threat model
@item
@samp{/qa} — real browser QA with regression test generation
@item
@samp{/retro} — weekly retrospective
@end itemize

@strong{Rule:} Run @samp{/office-hours} (gstack) or @samp{/grill-me} (mattpocock) at the @strong{start} of any
non-trivial session. These are your calibration tools. Skip them when you feel rushed.
That's exactly when you need them most.

@node Phase −1 — Pre-Sales / Pipeline
@section Phase −1 — Pre-Sales / Pipeline

@emph{Before the engagement exists. Hat: Trusted Advisor (selling by helping).}

You meet a prospect with almost no information. The goal is to capture
everything you hear, research to fill the gaps, and decide whether to pursue —
without yet committing to the deep, team-by-team discovery of Phase 1.

@itemize
@item
@samp{M-x org-fractional-cto-new-prospect} — create the prospect at @samp{LEAD} stage.
@item
@samp{C-c c el} — capture each pre-sales call: the ask in their words, pain
points, budget/timing signals, decision-makers, and the next step.
@item
@samp{C-c c eo} — log research findings (company, market, competitors, tech hints,
funding, people). Promote durable facts into @samp{CONTEXT.md}.
@item
@samp{C-c c eF} — a fit/qualification scorecard ending in a verdict: Pursue, Hold,
or Pass. On Pursue, note what to validate in the first deep discovery (@samp{ed}).
@end itemize

Advance the stage as conviction grows (@samp{M-x org-fractional-cto-set-stage}:
@samp{LEAD} → @samp{QUALIFIED}), and @samp{C-c a P} is your funnel board across all prospects.
When you win, @samp{set-stage} → @samp{ACTIVE} and proceed to Phase 0 — the hub, its
history, and every captured artifact carry straight over.

@node Phase 0 — Engagement Setup
@section Phase 0 — Engagement Setup

@emph{Days 1–3. Hat: Engagement Director.}

@menu
* Purpose::
* Checklist::
* Questions to answer::
* Capture templates::
* Deliverable::
@end menu

@node Purpose
@subsection Purpose

Establish the working relationship, boundaries, and rhythm before any technical work
begins. Everything in Phase 1 is harder if you skip this.

@node Checklist
@subsection Checklist

@itemize
@item
Create @samp{clients/<client>/CONTEXT.md} (domain vocabulary, key people, tech stack)
@item
Create system discovery master doc (@samp{C-c c ed} for sessions; master doc manually)
@item
Capture all known stakeholders (@samp{C-c c ep} for each)
@item
Confirm internal reporting line and executive sponsor
@item
Agree communication channels: async vs. sync, email vs. Slack, cadence
@item
Confirm ClickUp (or equivalent) workspace access
@item
Schedule recurring ceremonies: internal sync, client sync, QBR dates
@item
Draft role scope document — what you do and explicitly do not do
@item
Identify any compliance obligations (GDPR, CCPA, PCI, SOC2) upfront
@end itemize

@node Questions to answer
@subsection Questions to answer

@itemize
@item
Who are the decision makers vs. influencers on the client side?
@item
What does "success" mean to each key stakeholder personally (not the project)?
@item
What has failed or frustrated them in previous engagements?
@item
What's the one thing they'll judge this engagement on?
@end itemize

@node Capture templates
@subsection Capture templates

@itemize
@item
@samp{C-c c ep} Stakeholder profile — one per key contact
@item
@samp{C-c c ec} Commitment captured — any commitment made in setup calls
@item
@samp{C-c c er} Risk item — anything that looks like a blocker this early
@item
@samp{C-c c eP} Team member note — one per key internal team member (stream leads, eng leads)
@end itemize

@node Deliverable
@subsection Deliverable

Working @samp{CONTEXT.md}. Confirmed ceremony calendar. Role scope document shared internally.

@node Phase 1 — Discovery
@section Phase 1 — Discovery

@emph{Week 1–2. Hat: Discovery.}

@menu
* Purpose: Purpose (1). 
* Rhythm::
* Per-session approach::
* Questions that cut across all streams::
* Capture templates: Capture templates (1). 
* Deliverable: Deliverable (1). 
@end menu

@node Purpose (1)
@subsection Purpose

Build a grounded picture of the system: what exists, who owns it, where the debt
and risk live, and where innovation is possible. Do not skip streams that seem
"boring" (DevOps, QA) — they consistently surface the most critical risks.

@node Rhythm
@subsection Rhythm

One session per stream. After every 2–3 sessions, a 15-minute synthesis pass to
update cross-cutting sections of the master discovery doc before memory fades.

@node Per-session approach
@subsection Per-session approach

@enumerate
@item
Run @samp{/grill-me} or @samp{/zoom-out} (mattpocock/skills) @strong{before} the session to surface
what you're assuming and what you don't know
@item
Use @samp{C-c c ed} (discovery template) to start a clocked session
@item
During the session: listen for what they @strong{don't} say as much as what they do
@item
After the session: refile the capture; update the master doc immediately
@item
After every 2–3 sessions: update cross-cutting sections (security, tech debt, integrations)
@end enumerate

@node Questions that cut across all streams
@subsection Questions that cut across all streams

@itemize
@item
What would break first if load doubled tomorrow?
@item
What's the one thing you'd fix if you had a sprint of uninterrupted time?
@item
What do you not have visibility into that you wish you did?
@item
What's the thing nobody talks about but everyone knows is a problem?
@item
Where are the handoffs between your stream and others rough?
@end itemize

@node Capture templates (1)
@subsection Capture templates

@itemize
@item
@samp{C-c c ed} Discovery session (one per stream)
@item
@samp{C-c c et} Technical debt item (capture as you hear them)
@item
@samp{C-c c ex} Security finding (any compliance or security signal)
@item
@samp{C-c c er} Risk item (any delivery or engagement risk)
@end itemize

@node Deliverable (1)
@subsection Deliverable

Populated master discovery document with:
@itemize
@item
System architecture map
@item
Component inventory and integration map
@item
Per-domain deep dives
@item
Cross-cutting concerns (security, compliance, performance)
@item
Innovation opportunities list
@item
Open questions and priority action items
@end itemize

@node Phase 2 — Architecture Assessment
@section Phase 2 — Architecture Assessment

@emph{Week 2–4. Hat: Fractional CTO@.}

@menu
* Purpose: Purpose (2). 
* Approach::
* Checklist: Checklist (1). 
* Build vs. Buy decision frame: Build vs Buy decision frame. 
* Capture templates: Capture templates (2). 
* Deliverable: Deliverable (2). 
@end menu

@node Purpose (2)
@subsection Purpose

Turn discovery findings into decisions and direction. This is where you earn the
"CTO" part of the title — not by having all the answers, but by asking the right
questions and making the call when teams are stuck.

@node Approach
@subsection Approach

Use @samp{/office-hours} (gstack) before each significant architecture decision to
challenge your own framing. Architecture decisions made under time pressure without
a forcing function tend to optimise for comfort over correctness.

@node Checklist (1)
@subsection Checklist

@itemize
@item
ADR for each significant architectural decision in flight
@item
Technology roadmap draft: what we're building, what we're retiring, and when
@item
Technical debt register: prioritised, owned, with timelines
@item
Compliance posture document: gap analysis for each relevant framework
@item
Build vs. buy positions for all significant components
@item
Engineering standards baseline: what varies across teams that should be standardised
@item
Security posture assessment (run @samp{/cso} from gstack)
@end itemize

@node Build vs Buy decision frame
@subsection Build vs. Buy decision frame

Before recommending build:
@enumerate
@item
Does a commercial solution exist that solves 80%+ of the problem?
@item
What is the total 2-year cost of building vs. buying (including maintenance)?
@item
Is this a differentiating capability or commodity infrastructure?
@item
What is the opportunity cost of the engineering time?
@end enumerate

Before recommending buy:
@enumerate
@item
What is the lock-in exposure if we need to exit?
@item
Does it touch customer data? What are their data handling practices?
@item
Are there contractual terms that could bind the client uncomfortably?
@end enumerate

@node Capture templates (2)
@subsection Capture templates

@itemize
@item
@samp{C-c c ea} ADR — one per significant technology or architecture decision
@item
@samp{C-c c ev} Vendor evaluation — any tool or vendor being assessed
@item
@samp{C-c c et} Technical debt item — from the assessment, not just discovery
@item
@samp{C-c c ex} Security finding — from the compliance posture review
@end itemize

@node Deliverable (2)
@subsection Deliverable

Technology roadmap (quarters, not just quarters). ADR log. Technical debt register
with owners and timelines. Compliance gap analysis with remediation plan.

@node Phase 3 — Operating Rhythm
@section Phase 3 — Operating Rhythm

@emph{Ongoing. Multiple hats, scheduled.}

@menu
* Purpose: Purpose (3). 
* Ceremonies::
* Capture templates: Capture templates (3). 
* Managing client expectations::
@end menu

@node Purpose (3)
@subsection Purpose

Maintain visibility, momentum, and client trust through consistent, structured
communication. The rhythm removes the need to make "how often should I check in?"
decisions under pressure.

@node Ceremonies
@subsection Ceremonies

@strong{Daily (Hat: Discovery or Fractional CTO)}
@itemize
@item
Attend one or more team standups — observe, don't manage
@item
Capture notes and blockers (@samp{C-c c es})
@item
Any new blocker spotted → @samp{C-c c eb} immediately
@item
Identify anything that needs to surface to the client or internally
@end itemize

@strong{Weekly — Delegation review (Hat: People Manager)}
@itemize
@item
Friday, 15 minutes, before the week closes
@item
@samp{C-c c eW} — weekly review capture
@item
Check every WAITING item: has the owner responded? Is the deadline at risk?
@item
Ping directly (don't wait for standup) for anything due within 2 days
@item
@code{C-c a E} → "Delegated — Awaiting Response" block is your inbox
@item
Rule: nothing WAITING goes more than one week without a check-in
@end itemize

@strong{Weekly — Internal sync (Hat: Engagement Director)}
@itemize
@item
Monday, before any client-facing communication that week
@item
Template: @samp{C-c c ei}
@item
Topics: delegation status, commitments vs. reality gap, blockers to escalate,
risk register updates, client comms review
@item
Rule: nothing surfaces to the client that hasn't been through this sync first
@end itemize

@strong{Weekly — Client sync (Hat: Engagement Director)}
@itemize
@item
Topics: delivery progress, decisions needed, anything that changed
@item
Template: @samp{C-c c em} (client meeting)
@item
Always send a written summary within 2 hours
@item
Capture any commitments made (@samp{C-c c ec}) during the call
@end itemize

@strong{Weekly — Sprint retrospective (Hat: People Manager)}
@itemize
@item
End of each sprint; separate from client sync
@item
Use @samp{gstack =/retro=} as the facilitation prompt
@item
Focus: team process, not delivery status (that's what the client sync is for)
@item
Output: 1–3 concrete process changes, captured as TODO items in the Actions section
@end itemize

@strong{Monthly — Client health check (Hat: Engagement Director)}
@itemize
@item
Three pulse questions (@samp{C-c c eh})
@item
Analyse the gap between what they say and what you observe
@item
Act on one thing from their feedback before the next month
@end itemize

@strong{Monthly — Architecture review prep (Hat: Fractional CTO)}
@itemize
@item
Review open ADRs, tech debt register, security findings
@item
Update technology roadmap
@item
Identify anything that needs a formal architecture review this quarter
@end itemize

@strong{Quarterly — QBR (Hat: Engagement Director)}
@itemize
@item
Template: @samp{C-c c eq}
@item
Translate delivery into business language — what did the client gain?
@item
Include one strategic recommendation they didn't ask for (business framing first)
@item
Surface renewal/expansion conversation naturally
@item
Send written summary within 24 hours
@end itemize

@strong{Quarterly — Architecture health review (Hat: Fractional CTO)}
@itemize
@item
Template: @samp{C-c c eA}
@item
Scalability, maintainability, integration fragility, dependency risk, tech debt
@item
Frame findings as transparency and forward planning, not a problem list
@end itemize

@node Capture templates (3)
@subsection Capture templates

@multitable {aaaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa}
@headitem Key
@tab Template
@tab Ceremony
@item @samp{C-c c es}
@tab Standup notes
@tab Daily
@item @samp{C-c c eg}
@tab Delegate action (WAITING)
@tab When delegating any task
@item @samp{C-c c eb}
@tab Blocker / escalation
@tab When a blocker is identified
@item @samp{C-c c eW}
@tab Weekly review
@tab Friday delegation + team review
@item @samp{C-c c em}
@tab Client meeting
@tab Weekly client sync
@item @samp{C-c c ei}
@tab Internal sync
@tab Weekly internal sync
@item @samp{C-c c eh}
@tab Client health check
@tab Monthly
@item @samp{C-c c eq}
@tab QBR
@tab Quarterly
@item @samp{C-c c eA}
@tab Architecture health review
@tab Quarterly
@end multitable

@node Managing client expectations
@subsection Managing client expectations

@itemize
@item
Under-promise on timelines; over-deliver on quality
@item
Bring problems with mitigations, not just problems
@item
Never let a surprise reach the client — if something is going wrong, surface it early
and frame it as: "here's what's happening, here's what we're doing, here's what we
need from you"
@item
The client's confidence in you is built between meetings, not during them
@end itemize

@node Phase 4 — Growth & Innovation
@section Phase 4 — Growth & Innovation

@emph{Quarterly, alongside Phase 3. Hat: Engagement Director + Fractional CTO@.}

@menu
* Purpose: Purpose (4). 
* Innovation pipeline approach::
* Expansion conversation triggers::
* Scope change discipline::
* Capture templates: Capture templates (4). 
@end menu

@node Purpose (4)
@subsection Purpose

Expand the engagement scope and deepen the relationship through genuine strategic
value — not sales pushes. The best expansions feel like the client's idea.

@node Innovation pipeline approach
@subsection Innovation pipeline approach

@enumerate
@item
Capture opportunities as you discover them (@samp{C-c c en}) — never filter at capture time
@item
Monthly: review the pipeline and select one to develop into a brief
@item
Brief format: business opportunity first, technology second, effort estimate third
@item
Present the best one at each QBR under "Strategic Recommendation"
@item
Frame as: "here's what becomes possible if we@dots{}" not "here's what we could build"
@end enumerate

@node Expansion conversation triggers
@subsection Expansion conversation triggers

@itemize
@item
A stream is hitting a ceiling the client hasn't named yet
@item
You've identified a capability gap across multiple streams
@item
A partner or tool evaluation opens a new product direction
@item
The client asks a question that reveals a problem outside current scope
@end itemize

@node Scope change discipline
@subsection Scope change discipline

Any work identified outside the current SOW must be captured immediately (@samp{C-c c e})
and brought through the internal sync before any client conversation about it.
Never agree to out-of-scope work in a client meeting — "let me come back to you on
what that would look like" is always the right answer in the room.

@node Capture templates (4)
@subsection Capture templates

@itemize
@item
@samp{C-c c en} Innovation pipeline idea
@item
@samp{C-c c ee} Scope change / out-of-scope flag
@item
@samp{C-c c ev} Vendor evaluation (for new tools or partners)
@end itemize

@node New Client Onboarding Checklist
@section New Client Onboarding Checklist

When starting a new engagement, follow this sequence. The Emacs onboarding is now
fully automated via @samp{M-x org-fractional-cto-new-client} — no manual config editing needed.

@menu
* Step 1 — Emacs scaffold (60 seconds)::
* Step 2 — Fill CONTEXT.md: Step 2 — Fill CONTEXTmd. 
* Step 3 — Capture key contacts::
* Step 4 — Tools (if doing implementation work)::
* First week checklist::
@end menu

@node Step 1 — Emacs scaffold (60 seconds)
@subsection Step 1 — Emacs scaffold (60 seconds)

In Emacs: @samp{M-x org-fractional-cto-new-client}
@itemize
@item
Enter the client display name (e.g. "Acme Corp")
@item
Enter the client slug (lowercase, no spaces, e.g. "acme")
@end itemize

This automatically creates:
@itemize
@item
@samp{roam/clients/acme/acme.org} with all standard sections (Actions, Delegations, Blockers, People, etc.)
@item
@samp{roam/clients/acme/standup.org} with stream-based standup template
@item
@samp{roam/clients/acme/CONTEXT.md} pre-populated with all section headers
@item
Adds the client directory to @samp{org-agenda-files} automatically
@end itemize

Then: set this session's active client:
@samp{M-x org-fractional-cto-set-active-client} → select the slug → captures will auto-route without prompting.

@node Step 2 — Fill CONTEXTmd
@subsection Step 2 — Fill CONTEXT.md

@itemize
@item
What the product is and what you're building
@item
Domain vocabulary (terms the team uses)
@item
Tech stack (as known at onboarding)
@item
Key people — client side and internal leads
@item
Active work streams and current priorities
@end itemize

Load this at the start of every Claude Code session on that account.

@node Step 3 — Capture key contacts
@subsection Step 3 — Capture key contacts

@itemize
@item
@samp{C-c c ep} — Stakeholder profile for each client-side decision maker
@item
@samp{C-c c eP} — Team member note for each internal stream lead
@end itemize

@node Step 4 — Tools (if doing implementation work)
@subsection Step 4 — Tools (if doing implementation work)

@itemize
@item
@samp{npx skills@@latest add mattpocock/skills} in the client repo
@item
Run @samp{/setup-matt-pocock-skills} once per repo
@item
@samp{gstack} is global (@samp{~/.claude/skills/gstack})
@end itemize

@node First week checklist
@subsection First week checklist

@itemize
@item
@samp{org-fractional-cto-new-client} run; CONTEXT.md populated
@item
Active client set: @samp{M-x org-fractional-cto-set-active-client}
@item
Agenda dashboard tested: @code{C-c a E} → should open the global dashboard
@item
Capture tested: @samp{C-c c ew} → should file to client's Actions section
@item
@samp{/grill-me} run before first client conversation
@item
Stakeholders captured: @samp{C-c c ep} for all known key contacts
@item
Team members captured: @samp{C-c c eP} for all stream leads
@item
First internal sync scheduled (Monday cadence)
@item
First client sync scheduled
@end itemize

@node Reference All Capture Templates
@section Reference: All Capture Templates

All engagement captures use the @samp{e} prefix. File-based templates live in:
@samp{roam/templates/engagement/}. Active client must be set (@samp{M-x org-fractional-cto-set-active-client})
or you will be prompted on each capture.

@menu
* Relationship & Communication::
* Action Tracking & Delegation::
* Risk & Delivery::
* Technical: Technical (1). 
@end menu

@node Relationship & Communication
@subsection Relationship & Communication

@multitable {aaaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa} {aaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa}
@headitem Full key
@tab Template
@tab Phase
@tab Hat
@item @samp{C-c c es}
@tab Standup notes
@tab 3
@tab Discovery
@item @samp{C-c c em}
@tab Client meeting
@tab 3
@tab Engagement Director
@item @samp{C-c c ei}
@tab Internal sync
@tab 3
@tab Engagement Director
@item @samp{C-c c ep}
@tab Stakeholder profile
@tab 0
@tab Engagement Director
@item @samp{C-c c ec}
@tab Commitment captured
@tab all
@tab Engagement Director
@item @samp{C-c c eh}
@tab Client health check
@tab 3
@tab Engagement Director
@item @samp{C-c c eq}
@tab QBR
@tab 3
@tab Engagement Director
@item @samp{C-c c eM}
@tab Metrics snapshot
@tab 3
@tab Engagement Director
@end multitable

@node Action Tracking & Delegation
@subsection Action Tracking & Delegation

@multitable {aaaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa}
@headitem Full key
@tab Template
@tab When
@item @samp{C-c c ew}
@tab Action item (quick TODO)
@tab Ad hoc task for yourself
@item @samp{C-c c eg}
@tab Delegate action (WAITING)
@tab Assigning a task to a team member
@item @samp{C-c c eb}
@tab Blocker / escalation
@tab When something is blocking delivery
@item @samp{C-c c eW}
@tab Weekly review
@tab Friday delegation + team pulse review
@item @samp{C-c c eP}
@tab Person / team member note
@tab Capacity, concerns, or wins to record
@end multitable

@node Risk & Delivery
@subsection Risk & Delivery

@multitable {aaaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa}
@headitem Full key
@tab Template
@tab Phase
@tab Hat
@item @samp{C-c c er}
@tab Risk item
@tab all
@tab Engagement Director
@item @samp{C-c c ee}
@tab Scope change
@tab all
@tab Engagement Director
@item @samp{C-c c ef}
@tab Post-mortem (incident)
@tab all
@tab all
@item @samp{C-c c eR}
@tab Retrospective
@tab each sprint
@tab People Manager
@end multitable

@node Technical (1)
@subsection Technical

@multitable {aaaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa} {aaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa}
@headitem Full key
@tab Template
@tab Phase
@tab Hat
@item @samp{C-c c ed}
@tab Discovery session
@tab 1
@tab Discovery
@item @samp{C-c c ek}
@tab Tech spike
@tab 1/2
@tab Fractional CTO
@item @samp{C-c c ea}
@tab ADR
@tab 2
@tab Fractional CTO
@item @samp{C-c c eD}
@tab Quick decision
@tab 2/3
@tab Fractional CTO
@item @samp{C-c c eA}
@tab Architecture health review
@tab 3
@tab Fractional CTO
@item @samp{C-c c ev}
@tab Vendor evaluation
@tab 2
@tab Fractional CTO
@item @samp{C-c c et}
@tab Technical debt item
@tab 1/2
@tab Fractional CTO
@item @samp{C-c c ex}
@tab Security finding
@tab 1/2
@tab Security Reviewer
@item @samp{C-c c en}
@tab Innovation idea (single)
@tab 4
@tab Fractional CTO
@item @samp{C-c c eI}
@tab Innovation meeting (multi-idea)
@tab 4
@tab Fractional CTO
@end multitable

@node Reference
@chapter Reference

A practical reference for running client engagements using the full tool stack:
org-mode captures, org-roam, the Fractional CTO playbook, mattpocock/skills,
and gstack. Read top-to-bottom once to understand the system; use as a lookup
reference after that.

All engagement captures use a single @samp{e} prefix (@samp{C-c c e<key>}) and route to the
@strong{active client}. Set it once per session with @samp{M-x org-fractional-cto-set-active-client} and every
capture files to that client automatically — no per-client prefix letters, no
copy-pasted config. Switch clients mid-session by setting a different active client.

The mechanics (captures, dashboard, onboarding) are provided by the
@samp{org-fractional-cto} package (@uref{../README.org, README}). This guide is the @strong{methodology} layer
on top of it: when to use each capture, the operating rhythm, and the hats.

@menu
* Quick Lookup — "I need to@dots{}"::
* Legend::
* File Organization::
* Capture Templates — Complete Reference::
* Operating Rhythms — Day by Day::
* The Hat Model in Practice::
* Tools Reference::
* New Client Setup::
* Scenario Guides::
@end menu

@node Quick Lookup — "I need to@dots{}"
@section Quick Lookup — "I need to@dots{}"

@menu
* Capture something::
* Act on an existing item::
* Look up / analyse::
@end menu

@node Capture something
@subsection Capture something

@multitable {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa}
@headitem I need to@dots{}
@tab Key
@tab Files to
@item Quick action / TODO
@tab @samp{C-c c ew}
@tab <client>.org → Actions
@item Pre-sales call / lead intake
@tab @samp{C-c c el}
@tab <client>.org → Pre-Sales Notes
@item Research note
@tab @samp{C-c c eo}
@tab <client>.org → Research
@item Fit / qualification
@tab @samp{C-c c eF}
@tab <client>.org → Qualification
@item Delegate a task (WAITING)
@tab @samp{C-c c eg}
@tab <client>.org → Delegations
@item Flag a blocker / escalation
@tab @samp{C-c c eb}
@tab <client>.org → Blockers
@item Weekly review (delegation + pulse)
@tab @samp{C-c c eW}
@tab <client>.org → Weekly Reviews
@item Note on a team member
@tab @samp{C-c c eP}
@tab <client>.org → People
@item Capture a standup
@tab @samp{C-c c es}
@tab <client>.org → Standup Notes
@item Log a client meeting
@tab @samp{C-c c em}
@tab <client>.org → Meeting Notes
@item Log an internal sync
@tab @samp{C-c c ei}
@tab <client>.org → Internal Syncs
@item Record a commitment made
@tab @samp{C-c c ec}
@tab <client>.org → Commitments
@item Flag a risk
@tab @samp{C-c c er}
@tab <client>.org → Risks
@item Start a discovery session
@tab @samp{C-c c ed}
@tab <client>.org → Discovery Sessions
@item Tech spike / investigation
@tab @samp{C-c c ek}
@tab <client>.org → Discovery Sessions
@item Add a stakeholder profile
@tab @samp{C-c c ep}
@tab <client>.org → Stakeholder Profiles
@item Log an architecture decision
@tab @samp{C-c c ea}
@tab <client>.org → Architecture Decisions
@item Quick decision log
@tab @samp{C-c c eD}
@tab <client>.org → Architecture Decisions
@item Record tech debt
@tab @samp{C-c c et}
@tab <client>.org → Technical Debt
@item Flag a security finding
@tab @samp{C-c c ex}
@tab <client>.org → Security Findings
@item Evaluate a vendor / tool
@tab @samp{C-c c ev}
@tab <client>.org → Vendor Evaluations
@item Run a QBR session
@tab @samp{C-c c eq}
@tab <client>.org → QBRs
@item Monthly health check
@tab @samp{C-c c eh}
@tab <client>.org → Health Checks
@item Metrics snapshot
@tab @samp{C-c c eM}
@tab <client>.org → Health Checks
@item Flag out-of-scope work
@tab @samp{C-c c ee}
@tab <client>.org → Scope Changes
@item Document a production incident
@tab @samp{C-c c ef}
@tab <client>.org → Post-Mortems
@item Sprint retrospective
@tab @samp{C-c c eR}
@tab <client>.org → Retrospectives
@item Capture an innovation idea
@tab @samp{C-c c en}
@tab <client>.org → Innovation Pipeline
@item Innovation meeting (multi-idea)
@tab @samp{C-c c eI}
@tab <client>.org → Innovation Pipeline
@item Quarterly arch review
@tab @samp{C-c c eA}
@tab <client>.org → Architecture Reviews
@item Scope change / SOW flag
@tab @samp{C-c c ee}
@tab <client>.org → Scope Changes
@end multitable

@node Act on an existing item
@subsection Act on an existing item

@multitable {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa}
@headitem I need to@dots{}
@tab Command
@item Delegate the action under my cursor
@tab @samp{M-x org-fractional-cto-delegate-at-point}
@item Raise a blocker against it
@tab @samp{M-x org-fractional-cto-block-at-point}
@item Create a new prospect (LEAD)
@tab @samp{M-x org-fractional-cto-new-prospect}
@item Set the engagement stage
@tab @samp{M-x org-fractional-cto-set-stage}
@end multitable

@node Look up / analyse
@subsection Look up / analyse

@multitable {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa}
@headitem I need to@dots{}
@tab Do this
@item Client dashboard (actions, delegations)
@tab @samp{C-c a E} (global; pre-filtered to active client if set)
@item Delegated items awaiting response
@tab @samp{C-c a E} → "Delegated — Awaiting Response" block
@item Blockers & escalations
@tab @samp{C-c a E} → "Blockers & Escalations" block
@item All open TODOs for this client
@tab @samp{C-c a E} → "Open Actions" block
@item Open commitments
@tab @samp{C-c a E} → "Commitments" block
@item Active risks
@tab @samp{C-c a E} → "Active Risks" block
@item Open security findings
@tab @samp{C-c a E} → "Open Security Findings" block
@item Open tech debt
@tab @samp{C-c a E} → "Open Tech Debt" block
@item Pending scope decisions
@tab @samp{C-c a E} → "Scope Changes — Pending Decisions"
@item Set active client (avoid repeated prompts)
@tab @samp{M-x org-fractional-cto-set-active-client}
@item Clear active client
@tab @samp{M-x org-fractional-cto-clear-active-client}
@item Prospect pipeline (all leads)
@tab @samp{C-c a P} (or @samp{M-x org-fractional-cto-pipeline})
@item Browse by section (meetings, risks, etc.)
@tab @samp{C-x C-f <client>.org} then navigate headings
@item Find a specific past note or doc
@tab @samp{M-x org-roam-node-find} (fuzzy search)
@item Search text across all org files
@tab @samp{C-c a s} (agenda search)
@item All entries with a specific tag
@tab @samp{C-c a m TAGNAME} (e.g. @samp{C-c a m RISK})
@item Challenge my own framing
@tab @samp{/grill-me} (mattpocock/skills)
@item Structure a big decision
@tab @samp{/office-hours} (gstack)
@item Security audit
@tab @samp{/cso} (gstack)
@item Run a sprint retrospective
@tab @samp{/retro} (gstack) + @samp{C-c c eR}
@item Onboard a new client
@tab @samp{M-x org-fractional-cto-new-client}
@end multitable

@node Legend
@section Legend

@menu
* keywords::
* Engagement stages (tag on the engagement heading)::
* Priorities::
* Type tags::
* Key bindings::
@end menu

@node keywords
@subsection @strong{TODO} keywords

@samp{org-fractional-cto-setup} registers these globally (via @samp{org-todo-keywords}), so
they work in every buffer without touching your personal Org config; client hubs
also declare them locally with @samp{#+TODO: TODO NEXT INPROGRESS WAITING | DONE
CANCELLED}. Customize via @samp{org-fractional-cto-todo-keywords}.

@multitable {aaaaaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa}
@headitem Keyword
@tab Meaning
@item @samp{TODO}
@tab Open action you own
@item @samp{NEXT}
@tab The next physical action (GTD-style)
@item @samp{INPROGRESS}
@tab Actively being worked
@item @samp{WAITING}
@tab @strong{Delegated} — owned by someone else, you're tracking it
@item @samp{DONE}
@tab Completed
@item @samp{CANCELLED}
@tab Dropped
@end multitable

@samp{WAITING} is load-bearing: it separates "things I owe" from "things I'm owed,"
and feeds the dashboard's @strong{Delegated} block.

@node Engagement stages (tag on the engagement heading)
@subsection Engagement stages (tag on the engagement heading)

One stage tag sits on the top @samp{* … Engagement} heading (e.g. @samp{:ACTIVE:}) and is
inherited by the whole tree. The @strong{client} identity tag (e.g. @samp{:ACME:}) is
declared at the file level via @samp{#+filetags}, not on the engagement heading.
Switch it with @samp{M-x org-fractional-cto-set-stage}.

@multitable {aaaaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa}
@headitem Stage
@tab Meaning
@item @samp{LEAD}
@tab Captured from a pre-sales call; raw
@item @samp{QUALIFIED}
@tab Researched and worth pursuing (pre-contract)
@item @samp{ACTIVE}
@tab Won / engaged — the default for new-client
@item @samp{LOST}
@tab Did not convert
@item @samp{DORMANT}
@tab Paused / on hold
@end multitable

The pipeline view (@samp{C-c a P}) lists every @samp{LEAD=/=QUALIFIED} engagement across
all clients, one line per prospect.

@node Priorities
@subsection Priorities

@multitable {aaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa}
@item @samp{[#A]}
@tab Blocking / time-critical (blockers default here)
@item @samp{[#B]}
@tab Important, not urgent
@item @samp{[#C]}
@tab Nice to have / backlog
@end multitable

@node Type tags
@subsection Type tags

Every capture carries a @strong{type tag}. The client identity is inherited from the
hub's @samp{#+filetags} line (e.g. @samp{#+filetags: :ACME:}) rather than being repeated
on individual headings or items. The dashboard and @samp{C-c a m TAG} search on these
type tags.

@multitable {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa}
@headitem Tag
@tab Section / capture
@item @samp{DELEGATED}
@tab Delegations (@samp{eg})
@item @samp{BLOCKER}
@tab Blockers (@samp{eb})
@item @samp{COMMITMENT}
@tab Commitments (@samp{ec})
@item @samp{RISK}
@tab Risks (@samp{er})
@item @samp{REVIEW}
@tab Weekly Reviews (@samp{eW})
@item @samp{PEOPLE}
@tab People (@samp{eP})
@item @samp{MEETING}
@tab Meeting Notes (@samp{em})
@item @samp{STANDUP}
@tab Standup Notes (@samp{es})
@item @samp{INTERNAL}
@tab Internal Syncs (@samp{ei})
@item @samp{DISCOVERY}
@tab Discovery / Tech spike (@samp{ed}, @samp{ek})
@item @samp{STAKEHOLDER}
@tab Stakeholder Profiles (@samp{ep})
@item @samp{ADR}
@tab Architecture Decisions (@samp{ea}, @samp{eD})
@item @samp{ARCHREVIEW}
@tab Architecture Reviews (@samp{eA})
@item @samp{VENDOR}
@tab Vendor Evaluations (@samp{ev})
@item @samp{TECHDEBT}
@tab Technical Debt (@samp{et})
@item @samp{SECURITY}
@tab Security Findings (@samp{ex})
@item @samp{HEALTH}
@tab Health Checks (@samp{eh}, @samp{eM})
@item @samp{QBR}
@tab QBRs (@samp{eq})
@item @samp{INNOVATION}
@tab Innovation Pipeline (@samp{en}, @samp{eI})
@item @samp{SCOPE}
@tab Scope Changes (@samp{ee})
@item @samp{POSTMORTEM}
@tab Post-Mortems (@samp{ef})
@item @samp{RETRO}
@tab Retrospectives (@samp{eR})
@item @samp{PRESALES}
@tab Pre-Sales Notes (@samp{el})
@item @samp{RESEARCH}
@tab Research (@samp{eo})
@item @samp{QUALIFICATION}
@tab Qualification (@samp{eF})
@end multitable

@node Key bindings
@subsection Key bindings

@multitable {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa}
@item @code{C-c c e<key>}
@tab Capture (see @ref{Capture Templates — Complete Reference, , capture reference})
@item @code{C-c a E}
@tab Global dashboard (pre-filtered to active client)
@item @code{C-c a m TAG}
@tab Match a type tag across all clients
@item @samp{M-x org-fractional-cto-new-client}
@tab New client (onboard)
@item @samp{M-x org-fractional-cto-set-active-client}
@tab Set active client
@item @samp{M-x org-fractional-cto-dashboard}
@tab Global dashboard (pre-filtered to active client)
@item @samp{M-x org-fractional-cto-switch-client}
@tab Switch client + open dashboard
@item @samp{M-x org-fractional-cto-new-prospect}
@tab New prospect (LEAD stage)
@item @samp{M-x org-fractional-cto-set-stage}
@tab Set engagement stage
@item @samp{M-x org-fractional-cto-upgrade-hub}
@tab Upgrade an old hub in place
@item @samp{C-c a P}
@tab Prospect pipeline (all leads)
@item @samp{M-x org-fractional-cto-delegate-at-point}
@tab Delegate the heading at point
@item @samp{M-x org-fractional-cto-block-at-point}
@tab Blocker against heading at point
@end multitable

Management commands run via @samp{M-x} by default (no global prefix is claimed).
They also live in @samp{org-fractional-cto-command-map} (keys @samp{n s k d w p S g b h}); set
@samp{org-fractional-cto-keymap-prefix} to bind it under a prefix of your choice.

@samp{g} (@samp{org-fractional-cto-delegate-at-point}) and @samp{b}
(@samp{org-fractional-cto-block-at-point}) act on the Org heading at point — both
from within a hub file and @strong{directly from any Org agenda line}:

@itemize
@item
@strong{Evil users}: `, g` (delegate) and `, b` (block) in the agenda's motion state
— no extra configuration needed.
@item
@strong{Non-Evil users}: set @samp{org-fractional-cto-agenda-keymap-prefix} to a prefix key
(e.g. @samp{"C-c C-'"}) for prefix access; otherwise reach them via @samp{M-x}.
@end itemize

@node File Organization
@section File Organization

The package ships the templates and these guides; your engagements live in
@samp{org-fractional-cto-clients-directory} (default @samp{<org-directory>/clients}).

The package (shareable, read-only to you):

@example
org-fractional-cto/
  org-fractional-cto.el          ← core: state, paths, keymap, setup
  org-fractional-cto-capture.el  ← the `e' capture group
  org-fractional-cto-agenda.el   ← the C-c a E dashboard
  org-fractional-cto-scaffold.el ← new-client onboarding
  templates/                     ← bundled capture templates (override-able)
    client_meeting.org adr.org discovery.org delegation.org blocker.org
    weekly_review.org retrospective.org standup.org ... etc.
  doc/
    playbook.org                 ← phases, hat model, decision frameworks
    reference.org                ← this file
  README.org                     ← install + manual + legend
@end example

Your engagements (yours, version-controlled separately):

@example
<clients-directory>/
  acme/                ← created by M-x org-fractional-cto-new-client
    acme.org           ← ★ OPERATIONAL HUB: all captures land here directly
    standup.org        ← per-client standup template (tailor the streams)
    CONTEXT.md         ← domain vocab, key people, stack (load in AI sessions)
  globex/
    globex.org
    standup.org
    CONTEXT.md
@end example

A non-client inbox (@samp{refile.org} or your @samp{org-default-notes-file}) still holds
generic captures (@samp{t}, @samp{n}, @samp{m}); engagement captures bypass it entirely.

@menu
* The capture flow::
* The lookup flow::
@end menu

@node The capture flow
@subsection The capture flow

Client captures go @strong{directly} to the relevant section of @samp{<client>.org} via
@samp{file+headline} — no inbox step, no refiling needed. Open @samp{<client>.org} (or any
client file) to see everything that has been captured for that account, organised
by section.

@samp{refile.org} is still the inbox for @strong{non-client} captures (generic todos, notes,
meeting entries via the @samp{t}, @samp{n}, @samp{m} keys). The discipline of clearing it still
applies, but client work bypasses it entirely.

@node The lookup flow
@subsection The lookup flow

@enumerate
@item
@strong{Agenda dashboard} — @samp{C-c a E} opens the @strong{global} dashboard spanning all
clients: 7-day agenda, delegated items awaiting response, blockers & escalations,
open actions, commitments with deadlines, active risks, security findings, tech
debt, and pending scope decisions. This is the daily starting point. When an
active client is set, the view opens pre-focused on that client via the native
tag filter (@samp{CATEGORY} column shows each entry's client). Use @samp{/} to widen,
refocus, or clear the filter.
@item
@strong{Browse by section} — @samp{C-x C-f <client>.org} then navigate headings (@samp{C-c C-n/p}
to move between headings, @samp{S-TAB} to collapse/expand). Each section contains
all captures of that type in reverse-chronological order.
@item
@strong{Tag search} — @samp{C-c a m TAGNAME} to find entries across all agenda files by tag
(e.g. @samp{RISK}, @samp{COMMITMENT}, @samp{TECHDEBT}).
@item
@strong{Full-text search} — @samp{C-c a s} to search across all agenda files by keyword.
@item
@strong{org-roam} — @samp{M-x org-roam-node-find} for the longer-form reference docs
(role plan, system discovery).
@end enumerate

@node Capture Templates — Complete Reference
@section Capture Templates — Complete Reference

All engagement templates use the pattern: @samp{C-c c e<key>}. Captures file @strong{directly}
to the relevant section of the active client's @samp{<client>.org} (set the active
client with @samp{M-x org-fractional-cto-set-active-client} to avoid being prompted each time).
The client display name is auto-filled from the hub's @samp{#+title} — no @samp{Client:}
prompt appears. Clocked entries start the org-clock automatically.

@menu
* Relationship & Communication Templates::
* Action Tracking & Delegation Templates::
* Risk & Delivery Templates::
* Technical Templates::
@end menu

@node Relationship & Communication Templates
@subsection Relationship & Communication Templates

@menu
* @samp{es} — Standup Notes::
* @samp{em} — Client Meeting::
* @samp{ei} — Internal Sync::
* @samp{ep} — Stakeholder Profile::
* @samp{ec} — Commitment Captured::
* @samp{eh} — Client Health Check::
* @samp{eq} — QBR (Quarterly Business Review)::
@end menu

@node @samp{es} — Standup Notes
@subsubsection @samp{es} — Standup Notes

@emph{Use:} Attending any team standup. One capture per session you attend.
@emph{Clock:} Yes — tracks time spent in standups.
@emph{Fields:} Date (auto), client name.
@emph{Structure:} Per-team sections (Shipped / Next / Blockers) + Actions/Escalations.
@emph{After capturing:} Scan for any blocker that needs a risk entry (@samp{er}) or
commitment capture (@samp{ec}). Refile to client's discovery or ops folder.

@node @samp{em} — Client Meeting
@subsubsection @samp{em} — Client Meeting

@emph{Use:} Any call or meeting with the client — planning, status, ad hoc.
@emph{Clock:} Yes.
@emph{Fields:} Meeting title, client attendees, our attendees.
@emph{Structure:} Agenda → Discussion → Decisions → Commitments (both sides) → Actions → Follow-up deadline.
@emph{After capturing:} Immediately capture any commitments (@samp{ec}). Send written
summary to client within 2 hours. Never let a meeting end without a follow-up
summary — this is how trust is built.

@node @samp{ei} — Internal Sync
@subsubsection @samp{ei} — Internal Sync

@emph{Use:} Weekly internal sync with team leads — always before client-facing comms.
@emph{Clock:} Yes.
@emph{Fields:} Date, client name.
@emph{Structure:} Commitments vs. reality gap | Blockers to escalate | Risk updates |
Client comms review | Actions.
@emph{Rule:} Nothing surfaces to the client that hasn't passed through this sync first.

@node @samp{ep} — Stakeholder Profile
@subsubsection @samp{ep} — Stakeholder Profile

@emph{Use:} First time you meet or learn about a significant client contact. One profile
per person. Update it as the relationship develops.
@emph{Clock:} Yes.
@emph{Fields:} Full name, role, organisation.
@emph{Key sections:} Their personal definition of success (not the project's) | Key
priorities & concerns | Communication preferences | Relationship status |
How to engage them effectively.
@emph{Why it matters:} Stakeholder maps decay fast. Documenting what makes each person
tick lets you tailor every communication.

@node @samp{ec} — Commitment Captured
@subsubsection @samp{ec} — Commitment Captured

@emph{Use:} Any time a commitment is made — by you @strong{or} by the client — in any meeting.
Capture it immediately, while still in the session.
@emph{Clock:} Yes.
@emph{Fields:} Commitment description, due date (becomes a @samp{DEADLINE}), owner.
@emph{After capturing:} Refile to the commitment log in the client's document. Review
all open commitments at each internal sync.

@node @samp{eh} — Client Health Check
@subsubsection @samp{eh} — Client Health Check

@emph{Use:} Monthly. Three pulse questions sent to the client (or discussed in a call).
@emph{Fields:} Month, year.
@emph{Questions (built in):} What's working well? What would you change? What would you
love to see in the next 30 days?
@emph{After capturing:} Act on one specific thing from their feedback before next month.
The pattern of not acting on feedback is invisible until it's too late.

@node @samp{eq} — QBR (Quarterly Business Review)
@subsubsection @samp{eq} — QBR (Quarterly Business Review)

@emph{Use:} Quarterly formal checkpoint with client stakeholders.
@emph{Clock:} Yes.
@emph{Fields:} Quarter, client attendees, our attendees.
@emph{Structure:} Deliverables table | Business impact | Technology roadmap review |
Strategic recommendation | Next quarter priorities | Renewal/expansion | Decisions
needed | Action items.
@emph{After capturing:} Send written summary within 24 hours. The written summary is
part of the ceremony — don't skip it.
@emph{Strategic recommendation:} Always include one recommendation they didn't ask for.
Frame it as business opportunity first, technology second. This is what separates
a vendor from a strategic partner.

@node Action Tracking & Delegation Templates
@subsection Action Tracking & Delegation Templates

@menu
* @samp{ew} — Action Item (quick TODO)::
* @samp{eg} — Delegate Action (WAITING)::
* @samp{eb} — Blocker / Escalation::
* Acting on an item that already exists (@samp{delegate-at-point}, @samp{block-at-point}): Acting on an item that already exists (@samp{delegate-at-point} @samp{block-at-point}). 
* @samp{eW} — Weekly Review::
* @samp{eP} — Person / Team Member Note::
@end menu

@node @samp{ew} — Action Item (quick TODO)
@subsubsection @samp{ew} — Action Item (quick TODO)

@emph{Use:} A task you're taking on yourself. The fast path for ad-hoc work.
@emph{Clock:} Yes.
@emph{Fields:} Action description, due date (becomes a @samp{DEADLINE}).
@emph{After capturing:} Shows up in @samp{C-c a E} → "Open Actions". Re-prioritise as needed.

@node @samp{eg} — Delegate Action (WAITING)
@subsubsection @samp{eg} — Delegate Action (WAITING)

@emph{Use:} Any time you hand a task to a team member. This is the core delegation tool.
@emph{Fields:} Task, assignee (@samp{ASSIGNED_TO} property), expected delivery (@samp{DEADLINE}),
your check-in date (@samp{SCHEDULED}), success criteria.
@emph{Why WAITING:} The entry is created in the @samp{WAITING} state, not @samp{TODO}. This separates
"things I owe" from "things I'm owed" — they surface in the dedicated
"Delegated — Awaiting Response" block of @samp{C-c a E}.
@emph{After capturing:} The @samp{SCHEDULED} date is your follow-up trigger. If the check-in
passes with no update, escalate. Review every WAITING item at the Friday weekly review.
@emph{Discipline:} Delegation without a check-in date is hoping, not managing. Always set one.

@node @samp{eb} — Blocker / Escalation
@subsubsection @samp{eb} — Blocker / Escalation

@emph{Use:} The moment something is blocking delivery and you can't clear it yourself.
@emph{Fields:} What is blocked, what feature/stream it blocks (@samp{BLOCKING}), who can remove
it (@samp{UNBLOCK_OWNER}), root cause, options, escalation path, resolve-by deadline.
@emph{Priority:} Created as @samp{[#A] TODO}. Blockers are always top priority — they compound.
@emph{After capturing:} Surfaces in @samp{C-c a E} → "Blockers & Escalations". If unresolved by
the deadline, escalate via the named path (standup → internal sync → client).

@node Acting on an item that already exists (@samp{delegate-at-point} @samp{block-at-point})
@subsubsection Acting on an item that already exists (@samp{delegate-at-point}, @samp{block-at-point})

@samp{ew}, @samp{eg} and @samp{eb} @emph{create} entries. Two interactive commands act on the Org
heading already at point, so you never retype work that is already captured.

@itemize
@item
@samp{M-x org-fractional-cto-delegate-at-point} (@samp{g} in the command map) — the @samp{eg}
gesture applied in place. Sets the heading to @samp{WAITING}, adds the @samp{DELEGATED}
tag, records @samp{ASSIGNED_TO} and @samp{DELEGATED_ON}, and @samp{SCHEDULED=s your check-in;
  optionally sets a delivery =DEADLINE}. The item moves to the dashboard's
"Delegated — Awaiting Response" block. An assignee is required.
@item
@samp{M-x org-fractional-cto-block-at-point} (@samp{b} in the command map) — the @samp{eb}
gesture applied in place. Files a @samp{[#A]} blocker into the client's Blockers
section with @samp{BLOCKING} linked back to the action, and inserts a
back-reference under the action. Optional resolve-by @samp{DEADLINE}.
@end itemize

@emph{Discipline:} reach for these when the work is already on a heading; reach for
@samp{eg} / @samp{eb} when you are capturing something new. The back-link is an internal
@samp{[[*heading]]} link, so keep action headings distinctly named.

@node @samp{eW} — Weekly Review
@subsubsection @samp{eW} — Weekly Review

@emph{Use:} Friday, 15 minutes, before the week closes. Your delegation and team pulse review.
@emph{Clock:} Yes.
@emph{Fields:} Week ending.
@emph{Structure:} Shipped this week | What slipped and why | Delegation inbox check-in
table | Blockers to escalate | Key decisions | Team pulse | Top 3 next week | Comms to send.
@emph{The discipline:} This is where you reconcile every WAITING item against reality.
Anyone who's gone quiet gets a direct ping — don't wait for the next standup.
@emph{After capturing:} Each "change/action needed" becomes a TODO@. Use @samp{C-c a E} delegated
block as the source of truth while filling the inbox table.

@node @samp{eP} — Person / Team Member Note
@subsubsection @samp{eP} — Person / Team Member Note

@emph{Use:} Capturing something about a team member — capacity, a concern, a win, a
development need. Builds the People section over time.
@emph{Fields:} Name, role/stream, @samp{STREAM} property.
@emph{Why it matters:} As a fractional CTO you're managing people you didn't hire and
don't see daily. Tracking capacity signals (who's overloaded, who's a single point
of failure) is how you spot delivery risk before it becomes a missed deadline.
@emph{Maintain:} The People section also holds the Team Roster and Stream → Lead map —
keep those current as the team changes.

@node Risk & Delivery Templates
@subsection Risk & Delivery Templates

@menu
* @samp{er} — Risk Item::
* @samp{ee} — Scope Change / Out-of-Scope Flag::
* @samp{ef} — Post-Mortem / Incident::
* @samp{eR} — Retrospective::
@end menu

@node @samp{er} — Risk Item
@subsubsection @samp{er} — Risk Item

@emph{Use:} Any new risk to the engagement or delivery — technical or otherwise.
Capture immediately when identified; don't wait for the next sync.
@emph{Fields:} Description, likelihood (High/Medium/Low), impact (High/Medium/Low), owner, mitigation.
@emph{After capturing:} Add to the risk register in the master discovery doc. Review
at every internal sync. A risk that sits in refile.org is not managed.

@node @samp{ee} — Scope Change / Out-of-Scope Flag
@subsubsection @samp{ee} — Scope Change / Out-of-Scope Flag

@emph{Use:} Any time you identify work that is outside the current SOW, or the client
asks for something that may be out of scope.
@emph{Fields:} Description, who identified it, SOW status (out/in/grey area).
@emph{Rule:} Never agree to out-of-scope work in a client meeting. Capture it here,
bring it through the internal sync, then respond to the client with a clear framing.
@emph{After capturing:} Internal sync review → commercial assessment → client response.

@node @samp{ef} — Post-Mortem / Incident
@subsubsection @samp{ef} — Post-Mortem / Incident

@emph{Use:} Any production incident, delivery failure, or significant quality issue.
@emph{Fields:} Incident title, date, severity, duration, what was affected.
@emph{Structure:} What happened | Root cause | How we fixed it | Was client notified? |
Prevention | Actions.
@emph{Timing:} Capture within 24 hours. The detail fades quickly.
@emph{Client communication:} "Here's what happened, here's what we did, here's what
we're doing to prevent recurrence." In that order.

@node @samp{eR} — Retrospective
@subsubsection @samp{eR} — Retrospective

@emph{Use:} End of each sprint or delivery cycle. Distinct from a post-mortem — a
retro is @strong{proactive and routine} (team process), a post-mortem is @strong{reactive} (a
failure). Run a retro whether or not anything went wrong.
@emph{Clock:} Yes.
@emph{Fields:} Sprint/period, facilitator, attendees.
@emph{Structure:} Sprint goals vs. actuals (table) | What went well | What didn't go
well | What we'll change (owned, time-boxed) | Team health signals | Action items.
@emph{Pair with:} gstack @samp{/retro} as the facilitation prompt before or during the session.
@emph{After capturing:} Each "what we'll change" row becomes a TODO in the Actions section.
@emph{Discipline:} Focus on the system, not the person. "What process let this happen?"
not "who dropped this?" The retro is for improving how the team works, not assigning blame.

@node Technical Templates
@subsection Technical Templates

@menu
* @samp{ed} — Discovery Session::
* @samp{ea} — Architecture Decision Record (ADR)::
* @samp{eA} — Architecture Health Review::
* @samp{ev} — Vendor / Tool Evaluation::
* @samp{et} — Technical Debt Item::
* @samp{ex} — Security Finding::
* @samp{en} — Innovation Pipeline Idea::
@end menu

@node @samp{ed} — Discovery Session
@subsubsection @samp{ed} — Discovery Session

@emph{Use:} Structured conversation with any team lead to map their stream. One per stream.
@emph{Clock:} Yes — these are significant sessions.
@emph{Fields:} Team/role, client, attendees, focus area, stream name.
@emph{Structure:} Team context | Active workstreams (table) | Tech stack (table) |
Architecture & integrations | Pain points | Quality & testing | Deployment & ops |
Tech debt (table) | Security observations | Innovation opportunities | Open questions |
Follow-up actions.
@emph{Before the session:} Run @samp{/grill-me} (mattpocock/skills) to surface your assumptions.
@emph{After the session:} Refile immediately. Update cross-cutting sections of the master
discovery doc. Run a synthesis pass after every 2–3 sessions.

@node @samp{ea} — Architecture Decision Record (ADR)
@subsubsection @samp{ea} — Architecture Decision Record (ADR)

@emph{Use:} Any significant technology or architecture decision — things that are hard to
reverse, affect multiple streams, or have long-term cost implications.
@emph{Clock:} Yes.
@emph{Fields:} Decision title, client, status (Proposed/Accepted/Deprecated/Superseded).
@emph{Structure:} Context (the forcing situation) | Decision (what and by whom) |
Alternatives considered | Trade-offs accepted | Consequences (positive/negative/risks) |
Review date.
@emph{Rule:} If you're spending more than 30 minutes deciding something, it warrants an ADR@.
A decision not documented is a decision that will be re-litigated.

@node @samp{eA} — Architecture Health Review
@subsubsection @samp{eA} — Architecture Health Review

@emph{Use:} Quarterly. A structured assessment of the full system's health.
@emph{Clock:} Yes.
@emph{Fields:} Quarter, year, client, your name, teams reviewed.
@emph{Structure:} Scalability | Maintainability | Integration fragility | Dependency risk |
Technical debt table | Technology roadmap review | Recommendations | How to present.
@emph{Framing for the client:} "Transparency and forward planning" — never a problem list.
The goal is to demonstrate that you're ahead of issues, not behind them.

@node @samp{ev} — Vendor / Tool Evaluation
@subsubsection @samp{ev} — Vendor / Tool Evaluation

@emph{Use:} Assessing any new tool, platform, or technology vendor.
@emph{Clock:} Yes.
@emph{Fields:} Vendor name, client, category, evaluator.
@emph{Structure:} Problem being solved | Recommendation (with rationale) | Alternatives |
Assessment (solves the problem? build vs. buy? lock-in? data handling? 2-year TCO) |
Decision deadline.
@emph{Decision framework:} Commodity infrastructure → buy. Differentiating capability → build.
Anything that touches customer PII → scrutinise the vendor's data handling terms first.

@node @samp{et} — Technical Debt Item
@subsubsection @samp{et} — Technical Debt Item

@emph{Use:} Immediately when you identify tech debt — during discovery, code review,
architecture sessions, or standups.
@emph{Fields:} Description, area (Frontend/Backend/Infra/Integration/Data/Security),
severity (Critical/High/Medium/Low), discovery context, impact if unaddressed.
@emph{After capturing:} Add to the tech debt register in the master discovery doc.
Prioritise at the next architecture session. Debt that isn't visible isn't managed.

@node @samp{ex} — Security Finding
@subsubsection @samp{ex} — Security Finding

@emph{Use:} Any security or compliance observation — immediately when found.
@emph{Fields:} Finding description, severity, area (PCI/GDPR/API/Auth/Data/Infra),
current status (Open/Mitigated/Resolved/Accepted), recommended action, owner.
Closed-out findings (Resolved/Mitigated) drop off the dashboard's "Open security
findings" block — the same rule as the risk register.
@emph{Rule:} Critical findings surface to the internal sync before end of day.
High findings surface within 48 hours. Never downgrade severity to avoid a
difficult conversation.

@node @samp{en} — Innovation Pipeline Idea
@subsubsection @samp{en} — Innovation Pipeline Idea

@emph{Use:} Any time you spot something that could be done better, smarter, or that the
client doesn't yet know is possible. Capture without filtering — evaluate later.
@emph{Fields:} Title, category (AI/ML / Data / Platform / Integration / Music Tech / Other).
@emph{Structure:} The opportunity (business framing first) | The technology | Why now /
why this client | Rough effort | Next step.
@emph{Pipeline review:} Monthly — select one idea to develop into a brief. Present the
best one at each QBR as the "Strategic Recommendation."

@node Operating Rhythms — Day by Day
@section Operating Rhythms — Day by Day

@menu
* Daily::
* Weekly::
* Monthly::
* Quarterly::
@end menu

@node Daily
@subsection Daily

@example
Morning (15 min)
  └── Review refile.org inbox — refile or act on anything from yesterday
  └── Check open commitments and today's deadlines in agenda (C-c a a)
  └── Identify which hat today's sessions require

During day
  └── Attend standups → C-c c es (clock in)
  └── Capture risks, debt, security findings immediately when spotted
  └── Any client meeting → C-c c em + send summary within 2 hours

End of day (10 min)
  └── Refile today's captures from refile.org
  └── Any commitment made today → C-c c ec (if not already done)
  └── Anything that surfaced that needs to go to Monday's internal sync?
@end example

@node Weekly
@subsection Weekly

@example
Monday (internal sync first — then nothing client-facing until done)
  └── C-c c ei — internal sync
  └── Review: commitments vs. reality gap, risk register, blockers
  └── Decide: what goes to the client this week and how

Wednesday / Thursday (client sync)
  └── C-c c em — client meeting
  └── Send written summary within 2 hours
  └── Any commitments → C-c c ec immediately after

Friday (weekly close — 20 min)
  └── Clear refile.org inbox
  └── Review open commitments — anything at risk of missing deadline?
  └── One sentence in the discovery/ops doc Reflection log: what changed this week
@end example

@node Monthly
@subsection Monthly

@example
First week
  └── Client health check → C-c c eh
  └── Review open risks — anything escalating or resolved?
  └── Review innovation pipeline → pick one idea to develop into a brief

Third week
  └── Architecture review prep: review open ADRs, debt register, security findings
  └── Update technology roadmap if anything shifted
  └── Draft any discovery synthesis notes that have been accumulating
@end example

@node Quarterly
@subsection Quarterly

@example
End of quarter
  └── Architecture health review → C-c c eA
  └── QBR preparation: translate all delivery into business outcomes
  └── Select strategic recommendation for the QBR (from innovation pipeline)
  └── QBR session → C-c c eq
  └── Send QBR written summary within 24 hours
  └── Review: any scope expansion opportunity to progress next quarter?
@end example

@node The Hat Model in Practice
@section The Hat Model in Practice

Switching hats mid-session dilutes both. When you sit down to work, know which
hat you're wearing and stick to it for the duration of that block.

@menu
* Before any significant session::
* Hat descriptions::
@end menu

@node Before any significant session
@subsection Before any significant session

Run one of these first — it takes 5 minutes and prevents hours of rework:

@multitable {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa}
@headitem Session type
@tab Run first
@tab Why
@item Discovery interview
@tab @samp{/grill-me}
@tab Surface what you're assuming; don't anchor the conversation to your frame
@item Architecture decision
@tab @samp{/office-hours}
@tab Challenge your own framing before committing
@item Client meeting (complex topic)
@tab @samp{/grill-with-docs} + SOW
@tab Verify you're solving the right problem
@item Starting implementation in an unfamiliar area
@tab @samp{/zoom-out}
@tab Map the system before touching it
@item Handoff between sessions
@tab @samp{/handoff}
@tab Compact the context so the next session starts fresh
@item Security review
@tab @samp{/cso}
@tab OWASP Top 10 + STRIDE, with false-positive filtering
@end multitable

@node Hat descriptions
@subsection Hat descriptions

@strong{Discovery hat}
You are listening, not advising. Your job is to surface reality, not impose
structure. Ask "what would break first if@dots{}" and "what's the thing nobody
talks about but everyone knows is a problem?" Take the full discovery template
notes. Don't jump to solutions in the session.

@strong{Fractional CTO hat}
You are making or advising decisions. Use @samp{/office-hours} to challenge your frame
first. Document every significant decision as an ADR@. The value is not the answer —
it's the documented reasoning that lets the team build on it without re-litigating.

@strong{Engagement Director hat}
You are managing the relationship. Speak business outcomes, not tech. Translate
everything into: what did the client gain? What risk did we reduce? What opportunity
does this create? Never bring a problem without a mitigation framing.

@strong{QA Auditor hat}
Find the gaps the team has normalised. Ask specifically about: billing logic test
coverage, auth flow integration tests, regression coverage before releases. Teams
stop seeing their own coverage gaps after a while.

@strong{Security Reviewer hat}
Assume breach, work backwards. What data would be exposed? What's the blast radius?
Use @samp{/cso} (gstack) for the systematic scan. Flag immediately — severity doesn't
get negotiated.

@strong{DevOps hat}
Optimise for recovery speed, not uptime. Questions: how fast can you detect an
incident? How fast can you roll back? What's the MTTR@? Infrastructure-as-code
posture? Where are secrets stored?

@node Tools Reference
@section Tools Reference

@menu
* org-capture (@samp{C-c c})::
* org-agenda (@samp{C-c a})::
* org-clock::
* org-refile::
* org-roam::
* How AI skills associate with an Org work item::
* mattpocock/skills::
* gstack (garrytan/gstack)::
@end menu

@node org-capture (@samp{C-c c})
@subsection org-capture (@samp{C-c c})

The entry point for all structured note-taking. Engagement captures (@samp{e} prefix)
file @strong{directly} to the relevant section of the active client's @samp{<client>.org}
— no refile step. Generic captures (@samp{t}, @samp{n}, @samp{m}) still go to @samp{refile.org}.

Essential keybindings:
@multitable {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa}
@headitem Key
@tab Action
@item @samp{C-c c}
@tab Open capture menu
@item @samp{C-c c e}
@tab Jump directly to client group
@item @samp{C-c C-c}
@tab Confirm and file the capture
@item @samp{C-c C-k}
@tab Abort the capture
@item @samp{C-c C-w}
@tab Refile a heading (for refile.org inbox items)
@item @samp{C-x C-s} in capture
@tab Save without closing
@end multitable

@node org-agenda (@samp{C-c a})
@subsection org-agenda (@samp{C-c a})

Your operational dashboard. Key views:

@multitable {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa}
@headitem Key
@tab View
@item @samp{C-c a a}
@tab Day/week agenda — deadlines, scheduled items (all files)
@item @samp{C-c a E}
@tab ★ Global dashboard (9 blocks) — spans all clients; pre-focused to active client when set; use @samp{/} to widen or refocus
@item @samp{C-c a t}
@tab All TODO items across all agenda files
@item @samp{C-c a m TAGNAME}
@tab Match by tag — e.g. @samp{RISK}, @samp{COMMITMENT}, @samp{DELEGATED}, @samp{BLOCKER}
@item @samp{C-c a s}
@tab Full-text search across all agenda files
@end multitable

@samp{C-c a E} is a first-class Org agenda command (so it exports, filters with @samp{/},
refreshes with @samp{r}, etc.). It spans @strong{all} client files; when an active client is
set the view opens pre-focused to it via @samp{org-agenda-tag-filter-preset} — the
@samp{CATEGORY} column shows each entry's client. Use @samp{/} to widen, refocus, or clear
the filter; there is no separate focus command. New clients work the moment
@samp{org-fractional-cto-new-client} scaffolds them — no per-client agenda config to
maintain. Blocks, in order: 7-day agenda → Delegated (WAITING) → Blockers → Open
Actions → Commitments → Active Risks → Open Security Findings → Open Tech Debt →
Scope Changes. @samp{M-x org-fractional-cto-switch-client} switches client and opens
it.

@node org-clock
@subsection org-clock

All discovery sessions, meetings, and reviews are clocked (the templates include
@samp{:clock-in t}). This gives you automatic time tracking per engagement.

@multitable {aaaaaaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa}
@headitem Key
@tab Action
@item @samp{C-c C-x C-i}
@tab Clock in to current heading
@item @samp{C-c C-x C-o}
@tab Clock out
@item @samp{C-c C-x C-r}
@tab Insert clock report at point
@item @samp{C-c C-x C-d}
@tab Show time spent on subtree
@end multitable

Monthly: @samp{M-x org-clock-report} in the client's master doc to see time by stream.

@node org-refile
@subsection org-refile

After capturing, refile entries from @samp{refile.org} to their permanent home:

@multitable {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa}
@headitem Key
@tab Action
@item @samp{C-c C-w}
@tab Refile current heading
@item @samp{C-u C-c C-w}
@tab Refile and jump to destination
@item @samp{C-u C-u C-c C-w}
@tab Jump to last refile location
@end multitable

Type part of the destination heading name; org-refile searches across all agenda files
up to 9 levels deep (configured in @samp{init-org.el}).

@node org-roam
@subsection org-roam

The long-form note graph. Discovery docs and role plans are org-roam nodes (they
have @samp{:ID:} properties and live in @samp{roam/}).

@multitable {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa}
@headitem Key (default / Doom)
@tab Action
@item @samp{M-x org-roam-node-find}
@tab Find or create a roam node
@item @samp{M-x org-roam-node-insert}
@tab Insert a link to another node
@item @samp{M-x org-roam-buffer-toggle}
@tab Show backlinks panel
@item @samp{M-x org-roam-db-autosync-mode}
@tab Enable auto-sync (run once)
@end multitable

After moving roam files: run @samp{M-x org-roam-db-sync} to rebuild the database.

@node How AI skills associate with an Org work item
@subsection How AI skills associate with an Org work item

There is no automatic binding between an Org heading and a skill — the link is
deliberate and manual, and that is the point. The flow is always:

@enumerate
@item
@strong{Pick the work item in Org} — an ADR you're about to write (@samp{ea}), a tech
spike (@samp{ek}), a discovery session (@samp{ed}), a security review (@samp{ex}).
@item
@strong{Open the client's code repo} in your AI tool (Claude Code, etc.) and load
its @samp{CONTEXT.md} so the agent has the domain vocabulary.
@item
@strong{Run the matching skill} in that repo's AI session (tables below).
@item
@strong{Capture the outcome} back into Org with the relevant @samp{e} key.
@end enumerate

So Org tells you @emph{what} and @emph{why}; the skill helps you @emph{do} it; Org records the
@emph{outcome}. The skills live in your code repositories, never in @samp{org-files}.

@node mattpocock/skills
@subsection mattpocock/skills

Slash commands for focused, disciplined AI-assisted work.
Install: @samp{npx skills@@latest add mattpocock/skills} in the project repo.
Setup: run @samp{/setup-matt-pocock-skills} once per repo.

@multitable {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa}
@headitem Skill
@tab When to use
@tab What it does
@item @samp{/grill-me}
@tab Before any significant session
@tab Structured interview that surfaces misalignment and assumptions
@item @samp{/grill-with-docs}
@tab Before working on a spec/SOW
@tab Anchors the grilling to a specific document
@item @samp{/zoom-out}
@tab When starting work in unfamiliar area
@tab Maps the system before touching it
@item @samp{/tdd}
@tab Any implementation work
@tab Enforces red-green-refactor; no tests = no code
@item @samp{/diagnose}
@tab Debugging a problem
@tab Systematic root-cause loop
@item @samp{/handoff}
@tab Switching sessions or handing off
@tab Compacts context to a temp file; references artifacts by path
@item @samp{/to-prd}
@tab Client has a rough idea
@tab Turns a conversation into a structured PRD
@item @samp{/to-issues}
@tab PRD exists
@tab Breaks it into discrete trackable issues
@item @samp{/write-a-skill}
@tab New repeatable pattern identified
@tab Codifies the pattern into a reusable skill
@end multitable

The @samp{CONTEXT.md} file (@samp{roam/clients/<client>/CONTEXT.md}) is the domain glossary
for a client. Load it at the start of every Claude Code session on that account.
It stops you from re-explaining domain vocabulary every session.

@node gstack (garrytan/gstack)
@subsection gstack (garrytan/gstack)

A sprint-structured software factory. Install:
@samp{git clone https://github.com/garrytan/gstack ~/.claude/skills/gstack && ./setup}

@multitable {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa}
@headitem Skill
@tab When to use
@tab What it does
@item @samp{/office-hours}
@tab Before committing to any direction
@tab Six forcing questions that challenge your framing
@item @samp{/autoplan}
@tab Starting a significant implementation
@tab Chains CEO, engineering, and design reviews
@item @samp{/plan-eng-review}
@tab Architecture or data flow decisions
@tab Engineering review with diagrams and edge cases
@item @samp{/review}
@tab After any implementation
@tab Staff-engineer audit; auto-fixes obvious issues
@item @samp{/cso}
@tab Security posture reviews
@tab OWASP Top 10 + STRIDE threat model
@item @samp{/qa}
@tab Before any release
@tab Real browser QA with regression test generation
@item @samp{/retro}
@tab Weekly
@tab Team retrospective prompt
@item @samp{/document-release}
@tab After deploy
@tab Auto-updates all docs
@item @samp{/investigate}
@tab Debugging a complex issue
@tab Systematic root-cause analysis
@item @samp{/freeze} / @samp{/unfreeze}
@tab Working in sensitive areas
@tab Locks edits to a single directory
@end multitable

@strong{The rule:} @samp{/office-hours} before architecture. @samp{/grill-me} before discovery.
These are your calibration tools. The sessions where you feel least like you need
them are often the sessions where you most do.

@node New Client Setup
@section New Client Setup

Client onboarding is fully automated. No manual editing of @samp{init-org.el} needed.

@menu
* Step 1 — Run org-fractional-cto-new-client::
* Step 2 — Fill CONTEXT.md: Step 2 — Fill CONTEXTmd (1). 
* Step 3 — Set active client::
* Step 4 — Capture key contacts::
* Step 5 — Tools (if doing implementation work)::
* First week checklist: First week checklist (1). 
@end menu

@node Step 1 — Run org-fractional-cto-new-client
@subsection Step 1 — Run org-fractional-cto-new-client

In Emacs: @samp{M-x org-fractional-cto-new-client}
@enumerate
@item
Enter the client display name (e.g. "Acme Corp")
@item
Enter the client slug (lowercase, no spaces — e.g. "acme")
@end enumerate

This creates in one step:
@itemize
@item
@samp{roam/clients/acme/acme.org} — operational hub with all standard sections
@item
@samp{roam/clients/acme/standup.org} — standup template with stream slots
@item
@samp{roam/clients/acme/CONTEXT.md} — context file opened immediately for editing
@item
Registers the client in @samp{org-agenda-files} automatically (no reload needed)
@end itemize

@node Step 2 — Fill CONTEXTmd (1)
@subsection Step 2 — Fill CONTEXT.md

The file opens automatically after Step 1. Fill in:
@itemize
@item
What the product is and what you're building
@item
Domain vocabulary (terms the team uses — stop re-explaining every session)
@item
Tech stack as known at onboarding
@item
Key people: client side and our internal stream leads
@item
Active work streams and current priorities
@item
Key documents and external references
@end itemize

Load this at the start of every Claude Code session on that client's codebase.

@node Step 3 — Set active client
@subsection Step 3 — Set active client

@samp{M-x org-fractional-cto-set-active-client} → select the slug.

From this point on, @samp{C-c c e<key>} routes automatically to this client — no
per-capture prompting. Switch between clients mid-session with @samp{org-fractional-cto-set-active-client}.

@node Step 4 — Capture key contacts
@subsection Step 4 — Capture key contacts

@itemize
@item
@samp{C-c c ep} — Stakeholder profile for each client-side decision maker
@item
@samp{C-c c eP} — Team member note for each internal stream lead
@end itemize

@node Step 5 — Tools (if doing implementation work)
@subsection Step 5 — Tools (if doing implementation work)

@example
# In the client's codebase repo
npx skills@@latest add mattpocock/skills
# /setup-matt-pocock-skills once per repo in Claude Code
@end example

gstack is global (@samp{~/.claude/skills/gstack}) — no per-client install.

@node First week checklist (1)
@subsection First week checklist

@itemize
@item
@samp{org-fractional-cto-new-client} run; @samp{acme.org} and @samp{CONTEXT.md} created
@item
@samp{CONTEXT.md} populated with domain vocab, people, and stack
@item
Active client set: @samp{M-x org-fractional-cto-set-active-client}
@item
Agenda tested: @samp{C-c a E} → should open the global dashboard (pre-focused on the active client)
@item
Capture tested: @samp{C-c c ew} → should file to @samp{acme.org} Actions section
@item
@samp{/grill-me} run before first client conversation
@item
Stakeholders captured: @samp{C-c c ep} for all known client-side contacts
@item
Team leads captured: @samp{C-c c eP} for all stream leads
@item
First internal sync scheduled (Monday cadence)
@item
First client sync scheduled
@end itemize

@node Scenario Guides
@section Scenario Guides

@menu
* "I just had a discovery session"::
* "Something went wrong in production"::
* "Client asked for something that might be out of scope"::
* "I want to pitch an innovation idea"::
* "I need to make an architecture decision"::
* "Preparing for a QBR"::
* "Starting a new engagement for the first time"::
@end menu

@node "I just had a discovery session"
@subsection "I just had a discovery session"

@enumerate
@item
@samp{C-c C-x C-o} — clock out of the session
@item
Immediately refile the capture: @samp{C-c C-w} → client's discovery section
@item
Scan the session notes for:
@itemize
@item
Risks → @samp{er} for each
@item
Tech debt items → @samp{et} for each
@item
Security observations → @samp{ex} for each
@item
Innovation opportunities → @samp{en} for each
@end itemize
@item
Open the master system discovery doc, update:
@itemize
@item
Discovery Status table (tick the stream, add date)
@item
The relevant per-domain deep dive section
@end itemize
@item
If this was session 2 or 3: do a synthesis pass on cross-cutting sections
(tech debt aggregate, integration map, security table)
@end enumerate

@node "Something went wrong in production"
@subsection "Something went wrong in production"

@enumerate
@item
@samp{ef} — post-mortem capture, clock in immediately
@item
Fill in: what happened, severity, what is affected
@item
Assess: does this need client notification? (Critical/High severity: yes)
@item
If client notification needed: verbal first, written summary within 1 hour
@itemize
@item
Frame: "here's what happened / here's what we did / here's what prevents recurrence"
@end itemize
@item
Internal: what process change prevents recurrence?
@item
After resolution: complete the post-mortem entry (root cause, prevention, actions)
@item
If it revealed a structural issue: @samp{ex} (security) or @samp{et} (tech debt)
@end enumerate

@node "Client asked for something that might be out of scope"
@subsection "Client asked for something that might be out of scope"

@enumerate
@item
In the meeting: "Let me come back to you on what that would look like" — never agree in the room
@item
@samp{ee} — scope change capture immediately after the call
@item
Bring it to Monday's internal sync (@samp{ei})
@item
Internal assessment: in scope / out of scope / grey area? Commercial impact?
@item
Client response: frame as opportunity, not dispute
@itemize
@item
"Here's what that would involve, here's what it would enable, here's how we'd approach it"
@end itemize
@end enumerate

@node "I want to pitch an innovation idea"
@subsection "I want to pitch an innovation idea"

@enumerate
@item
@samp{en} — capture the idea immediately, don't filter it yet
@item
Monthly pipeline review: shortlist to 1–2 ideas worth developing
@item
Develop into a brief: business opportunity → technology → why now / why this client → rough effort
@item
Run @samp{/office-hours} (gstack) to stress-test the framing before presenting
@item
Present at the next QBR as "Strategic Recommendation"
@item
Frame: "here's what becomes possible if@dots{}" — never "here's what we could build"
@end enumerate

@node "I need to make an architecture decision"
@subsection "I need to make an architecture decision"

@enumerate
@item
Run @samp{/office-hours} (gstack) — challenge your own framing first
@item
@samp{ea} — ADR capture, clock in
@item
Fill: Context (the forcing situation) → Alternatives considered → Trade-offs → Decision
@item
For any vendor/tool involved: @samp{ev} vendor evaluation
@item
For security implications: @samp{ex} security finding
@item
Mark the ADR status: Proposed → get relevant leads to review → Accepted
@item
Note review date — architecture decisions need scheduled re-evaluation
@end enumerate

@node "Preparing for a QBR"
@subsection "Preparing for a QBR"

@enumerate
@item
Three weeks before: run @samp{/zoom-out} across the discovery doc — what's the narrative?
@item
Two weeks before: run @samp{/office-hours} — what's the one strategic recommendation?
@item
One week before: draft QBR structure, translate all delivery into business outcomes
@itemize
@item
Not "we shipped X" — "X now means the client can do Y, which reduces risk Z"
@end itemize
@item
Run @samp{/grill-with-docs} on the QBR draft — where are you weak?
@item
QBR session: @samp{eq} — clock in
@item
Within 24 hours: send written summary (non-negotiable)
@end enumerate

@node "Starting a new engagement for the first time"
@subsection "Starting a new engagement for the first time"

Follow the full @ref{New Client Setup} checklist above, then run Phase 0 of the
@uref{playbook.org, Fractional CTO Playbook}.

The single most important thing in the first week: run @samp{/grill-me} (mattpocock/skills)
before your first substantive client conversation. You will have assumptions you
don't know you're making. Surface them before they cost you.

@bye
